The Project Gutenberg eBook of How to swim, by James H. Sterrett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: How to swim
       A practical manual of swimming by a practical swimmer and a guide
       to the novice as well as the expert showing the easiest methods
       of learning to swim, dive and float, various kinds of strokes,
       with directions and illustrations for acquiring the crawl and
       trudge-crawl strokes. Also a chapter on modern life-saving, and
       one for women and girl swimmers.

Author: James H. Sterrett

Release Date: March 27, 2023 [eBook #70397]

Language: English

Produced by: Bob Taylor, Sonya Schermann and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO SWIM ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_
  Bold text displayed as: =bold=




SPALDING ATHLETIC LIBRARY


SPALDING OFFICIAL ANNUALS

  No. 1.    SPALDING’S OFFICIAL BASE BALL GUIDE            Price 10c.
  No. 1S.   SPALDING’S OFFICIAL BASE BALL GUIDE
            (Spanish Edition)                              Price 10c.
  No. 2.    SPALDING’S OFFICIAL FOOT BALL GUIDE            Price 10c.
  No. 6.    SPALDING’S OFFICIAL ICE HOCKEY GUIDE           Price 10c.
  No. 7.    SPALDING’S OFFICIAL BASKET BALL GUIDE          Price 10c.
  No. 7A.   SPALDING’S OFFICIAL WOMEN’S BASKET BALL GUIDE  Price 10c.
  No. 9.    SPALDING’S OFFICIAL INDOOR BASE BALL GUIDE     Price 10c.
  No. 12A.  SPALDING’S OFFICIAL ATHLETIC RULES             Price 10c.
  No. 1R.   SPALDING’S OFFICIAL ATHLETIC ALMANAC           Price 25c.
  No. 3R.   SPALDING’S OFFICIAL GOLF GUIDE                 Price 25c.
  No. 55R.  SPALDING’S OFFICIAL SOCCER FOOT BALL GUIDE     Price 25c.
  No. 57R.  SPALDING’S LAWN TENNIS ANNUAL                  Price 25c.
  No. 59R.  SPALDING’S OFFICIAL BASE BALL RECORD           Price 25c.


Specially Bound Series of Athletic Handbooks

Flexible binding. Mailed postpaid on receipt of 50 cents each number.

  No. 501L. STROKES AND SCIENCE OF LAWN TENNIS

  No. 502L. HOW TO PLAY GOLF

  No. 503L. HOW TO PLAY FOOT BALL

  No. 504L. ART OF SKATING

  No. 505L. GET WELL—KEEP WELL

  No. 506L. HOW TO LIVE 100 YEARS

  No. 507L. HOW TO WRESTLE

  No. 508L. HOW TO PLAY LAWN TENNIS; HOW TO PLAY TENNIS FOR BEGINNERS

  No. 509L. BOXING

  No. 510L. DUMB BELL EXERCISES

  No. 511L. JIU JITSU

  No. 512L. SPEED SWIMMING

  No. 513L. WINTER SPORTS

  No. 514L. HOW TO BOWL

  No. 515L. HOW TO SWIM AND COMPETITIVE DIVING

  No. 516L. SCHOOL TACTICS AND MAZE RUNNING; CHILDREN’S GAMES

  No. 517L. TEN AND TWENTY MINUTE EXERCISES

  No. 518L. INDOOR AND OUTDOOR GYMNASTIC GAMES

  No. 519L. SPALDING’S OFFICIAL BASE BALL GUIDE

  No. 520L. SPALDING’S OFFICIAL FOOT BALL GUIDE

  No. 521L. SPALDING’S OFFICIAL BASKET BALL GUIDE

  No. 522L. GOLF FOR GIRLS

  No. 523L. HOW TO PLAY BASE BALL; HOW TO UMPIRE; HOW TO MANAGE A
  TEAM, ETC.

  No. 524L. SPALDING’S LAWN TENNIS ANNUAL

  No. 525L. HOW TO PITCH; READY RECKONER OF BASE BALL PERCENTAGES

  No. 526L. HOW TO CATCH; HOW TO BAT

In addition to above, any 25 cent “Red Cover” book listed in
Spalding’s Athletic Library will be bound in flexible binding for 50
cents each; or any two 10 cent “Green Cover” or “Blue Cover” books in
one volume for 50 cents.

(Continued on the next page.)


ANY OF THE ABOVE BOOKS MAILED POSTPAID UPON RECEIPT OF PRICE

  11-30-16


  Group I.        Base Ball


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 1   Spalding’s Official Base Ball Guide
  No. 1S  Spalding’s Official Base Ball Guide. Spanish Edition.
  No. 202 How to Play Base Ball
  No. 219 Ready Reckoner of Base Ball Percentages
  No. 223 How to Bat
  No. 224 How to Play the Outfield
  No. 225 How to Play First Base
  No. 226 How to Play Second Base
  No. 227 How to Play Third Base
  No. 228 How to Play Shortstop
  No. 229 How to Catch
  No. 230 How to Pitch
          {How to Organize a Base Ball League
          {How to Organize a Base Ball Club
          {How to Manage a Base Ball Club
  No. 231 {How to Train a Base Ball Team
          {How to Captain a Base Ball Team
          {How to Umpire
          {Technical Base Ball Terms
  No. 232 How to Run Bases
  No. 350 How to Score
  No. 355 Minor League Base Ball Guide
  No. 356 Official Book National League of Prof. Base Ball Clubs
  No.   9 Spalding’s Official Indoor Base Ball Guide


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No. 59R. Official Base Ball Record (including College records)


  Group II.        Foot Ball


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 2   Spalding’s Official Foot Ball Guide
  No. 358 Official College Soccer Guide


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No. 39R. How to Play Soccer
  No. 47R. How to Play Foot Ball
  No. 55R. Spalding’s Official Soccer Foot Ball Guide


  Group III.        Tennis


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 157 How to Play Lawn Tennis
  No. 363 Tennis Errors and Remedies


_“Green Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 1P. How to Play Tennis—For Beginners. By P. A. Vaile


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No.  2R. Strokes and Science of Lawn Tennis
  No. 42R. Davis Cup Contests in Australasia
  No. 57R. Spalding’s Lawn Tennis Annual


  Group IV.        Golf


_“Green Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 2P. How to Learn Golf


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No.  3R. Spalding’s Official Golf Guide
  No.  4R. How to Play Golf
  No. 63R. Golf for Girls


  Group V.        Basket Ball


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 7   Spalding’s Official Basket Ball Guide
  No. 7A  Spalding’s Official Women’s Basket Ball Guide
  No. 193 How to Play Basket Ball


  Group VI.  Skating and Winter Sports


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No.  6 Spalding’s Official Ice Hockey Guide
  No. 14 Curling


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No.  8R. The Art of Skating
  No. 20R. How to Play Ice Hockey
  No. 28R. Winter Sports
  No. 72R. Figure Skating for Women


  Group VII.      Field and Track Athletics


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No.  12A Spalding’s Official Athletic Rules
  No.  27  College Athletics
  No.  55  Official Sporting Rules
  No.  87  Athletic Primer
  No. 156  Athletes’ Guide
  No. 178  How to Train for Bicycling
  No. 182  All Around Athletics
  No. 255  How to Run 100 Yards
  No. 302  Y. M. C. A. Official Handbook
  No. 317  Marathon Running
  No. 342  Walking for Health and Competition
  No. 362  Track, Relay and Cross Country Rules of the National
           Collegiate Athletic Ass’n.


_“Green Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 3P. How to Become an Athlete By James E. Sullivan
  No. 4P. How to Sprint


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No. 1R. Spalding’s Official Athletic Almanac
  No. 17R. Olympic Games, Stockholm. 1912
  No. 45R. Intercollegiate Official Handbook
  No. 48R. Distance and Cross Country Running
  No. 70R. How to Become a Weight Thrower


  Group VIII.      School Athletics


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 246 Athletic Training for Schoolboys
  No. 331 Schoolyard Athletics


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No. 61R. School Tactics and Maze Running; Children’s Games
  No. 66R. Calisthenic Drills and Fancy Marching and Physical
           Training for the School and Class Room
  No. 71R. Public Schools Athletic League Official Handbook


  Group IX.      Water Sports


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 128 How to Row
  No. 129 Water Polo
  No. 361 Intercollegiate Swimming Guide


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No. 36R. Speed Swimming
  No. 37R. How to Swim and Competitive Diving
  No. 60R. Canoeing and Camping


  Group X.        Athletic Games for Women and Girls


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 7A Spalding’s Official Women’s Basket Ball Guide
  No. 314 Girls’ Athletics


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No. 38R. Field Hockey
  No. 41R. Newcomb
  No. 63R. Golf for Girls
  No. 69R. Girls and Athletics


  Group XI.    Lawn and Field Games


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 167 Quoits
  No. 170 Push Ball
  No. 180 Ring Hockey
  No. 199 Equestrian Polo
  No. 201 How to Play Lacrosse
  No. 207 Lawn Bowls


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

No. 6R. Cricket, and How to Play It


  Group XII.    Miscellaneous Games


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No.  13 American Game of Hand Ball
  No. 364 Volley Ball


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No. 43R. Archery, Roque, Croquet, English Croquet, Lawn Hockey,
           Tether Ball, Clock Golf, Golf-Croquet, Hand Tennis, Hand
           Polo, Wicket Polo, Badminton, Drawing Room Hockey, Garden
           Hockey, Basket Goal, Volley Ball Rules and Pin Ball
  No. 49R. How to Bowl
  No. 50R. Court Games


  Group XIII.      Manly Sports


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 191 How to Punch the Bag
  No. 282 Roller Skating Guide


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No. 11R. Fencing Foil Work Illustrated
  No. 19R. Professional Wrestling
  No. 21R. Jiu Jitsu
  No. 25R. Boxing
  No. 30R. The Art of Fencing
  No. 65R. How to Wrestle


  Group XIV.      Calisthenics


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

No. 10R. Single Stick Drill No. 16R. Team Wand Drill No. 22R. Indian
Clubs and Dumb Bells and Pulley Weights No. 24R. Dumb Bell Exercises
No. 73R. Graded Calisthenics and Dumb Bell Drills


  Group XV.      Gymnastics


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 124 How to Become a Gymnast
  No. 254 Barnjum Bar Bell Drill
  No. 287 Fancy Dumb Bell and Marching Drills


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No. 14R. Trapeze, Long Horse and Rope Exercises
  No. 34R. Grading of Gym. Exercises
  No. 40R. Indoor and Outdoor Gymnastic Games
  No. 52R. Pyramid Building
  No. 56R. Tumbling for Amateurs and Ground Tumbling
  No. 67R. Exercises on the Side Horse; Exercises on the Flying Rings.
  No. 68R. Horizontal Bar Exercises; Exercises on Parallel Bars


  Group XVI.      Home Exercising


_“Blue Cover” Series, each number 10c._

  No. 161 Ten Minutes’ Exercise for Busy Men
  No. 185 Hints on Health
  No. 325 Twenty-Minute Exercises


_“Red Cover” Series, each number 25c._

  No.  7R. Physical Training Simplified
  No.  9R. How to Live 100 Years
  No. 23R. Get Well; Keep Well
  No. 33R. Tensing Exercises
  No. 51R. 285 Health Answers
  No. 54R. Medicine Ball Exercises, Indigestion Treated by Gymnastics,
           Physical Education and Hygiene
  No. 62R. The Care of the Body
  No. 64R. Muscle Building; Health by Muscular Gymnastics


ANY OF THE ABOVE BOOKS MAILED POSTPAID UPON RECEIPT OF PRICE

  11-30-16


[Illustration: Sincerely and swimmingly yours,

  James H. Sterrett (signature)




  SPALDING “RED COVER” SERIES OF
  ATHLETIC HANDBOOKS
  NO. 37 R

  HOW TO SWIM

  A Practical Manual of Swimming by a
  Practical Swimmer and a Guide
  to the Novice as well as
  the Expert

  Showing the Easiest Methods of Learning to Swim, Dive
  and Float, Various Kinds of Strokes, with Directions
  and Illustrations for Acquiring the Crawl and
  Trudge-Crawl Strokes. Also a Chapter
  on Modern Life-Saving, and One for
  Women and Girl Swimmers.

  By

  JAMES H. STERRETT

  Organizer of the first American swimming club, authority on
  swimming matters, and successful amateur coach.

  REVISED AND ENLARGED EDITION

  PUBLISHED BY
  AMERICAN SPORTS PUBLISHING
  COMPANY
  NEW YORK CITY




  COPYRIGHT 1917
  BY
  AMERICAN SPORTS PUBLISHING COMPANY
  NEW YORK




James H. Sterrett


The author of this little volume originally compiled the material
at the request of the late James E. Sullivan, with whom he was
associated in Amateur Athletic Union affairs for a great many years
and therefore naturally takes a more than passing interest in the
book. With the great advance that has been manifested in swimming, it
became necessary to make a thorough revision of the entire matter,
at the same time adding a new chapter in life-saving methods which
should prove invaluable.

While the author disclaims any attempt of self-laudation, still for
the benefit of the many who will read this volume and would like
to know his capability for assuming to teach the modern methods of
swimming, the following letters, from prominent authorities on the
sport, are reproduced:


  _L. deB. Handley, New York Athletic Club._

  “Jim Sterrett may be counted among the pioneers of swimming in this
  country. He was called the ‘Father of American Swimming’ when I
  entered the field of competition 20 years ago. Sterrett’s prolific
  pen, too, has done much to spread knowledge of developments. It was
  in one of his books that I read the first technical discussion of
  the principles of aquatic progression ever come to my notice, and
  his numerous articles on all branches of watermanship have ever
  held interest for me.”


  _Wm. E. Bernard, Jr., Swimming Coach, Girard College, Philadelphia._

  “Mr. Sterrett is known from coast to coast as an authority on
  swimming, as well as a successful amateur coach. He taught me a
  lot ten years ago, and I am now successfully using his methods in
  teaching boys at Girard College.”


  _William G. Friedgen, Philadelphia Turngemeinde._

  “Through the early years of Mr. Sterrett’s connection with the
  Philadelphia Swimming Club, which he organized in 1890, he was
  the guiding spirit of that body of enthusiastic devotees of the
  sport, always having in view the teaching and propagation of the
  art of natation among its members, as well as to assist in similar
  development in other organizations. He lent his aid to the Athletic
  Club of the Schuylkill Navy and the Y.M.C.A., and was one of the
  original members of the Swimming Committee of the Philadelphia
  Turngemeinde, besides being instrumental in promoting many national
  and district swimming tournaments, thus affording frequent
  opportunity for competitions.”


  _John W. Stevens, Swimming Instructor, First Regiment Pool,
  Philadelphia._

  “As an expert authority on swimming, James H. Sterrett classes
  among the foremost in the country, and I attribute my success in
  the swimming world, both as a swimmer and a teacher, to him—being
  a pupil of his when a boy, and a close follower of his methods as
  a teacher. He is a never tiring worker in his endeavor to further
  the interest in swimming and his advice and criticism is always in
  demand.”


  _F. Vance Veith, Swimming Coach, Los Angeles A.C., California._

  “In my early days of competition, Mr. Sterrett showed me a lot
  about advanced swimming. I remember once how, in the Central
  Y.M.C.A. of Philadelphia, before I became a professional swimming
  teacher, Jim held himself up by the arms on the iron fence at the
  side of the bath, and demonstrated the crawl kick for me, and then
  while in the water, gave me some pointers which improved my speed
  over the 100 yards 10 seconds in two weeks’ practice. I use his
  methods now in teaching, and owe much of my success to his precepts
  and examples.”


  _Thomas G. Whitaker, Coach, Missouri A.C., St. Louis, Mo._

  “Mr. James H. Sterrett can truly be called the Nestor of American
  swimming. Many times when the pastime took a slump, his unselfish
  and disinterested efforts were largely responsible for its
  rehabilitation, and only those who have known the man and come into
  personal contact with him, know what he has done for the sport, and
  what it owes him in this country. His kindly manner and encouraging
  advice has helped many youngsters to achieve their ambition in the
  swimming world.”


  _Andrew B. Kean, Charter Member P.S.C., Lansdowne, Pa._

  “There are many of our present-day ‘crack’ swimmers who owe their
  success to Jim Sterrett’s coaching. His advice to young swimmers is
  always on tap. He is ever ready and willing to do what he can to
  further the sport, and what he did for swimming in this part of the
  country would fill a volume.”


  _Prof. Charles Holroyd, Swimming Instructor, Training School,
  Pittsburgh, Pa._

  “Jim Sterrett’s work for swimming during the past 25 years has done
  much toward organizing the sport in this country. He has made it
  possible for a number of expert teachers to secure positions, while
  he himself has started many a young lad with the proper stroke, who
  has afterward become a successful racer.”


  _Charles B. Durborow, America’s Long-distance Swimmer._

  “I have had advice from numerous coaches in connection with my
  training for long-distance events, but Mr. Sterrett has been
  tireless in his interest in my swimming and has accompanied me on
  many of my big performances, and has always been a steadfast and
  dependable friend and adviser. I have closely watched his work as a
  coach of speed swimmers, in which line he has been so successful.”


  _Gordon M. Mullen, Swimming Instructor, Hygeia Baths, Atlantic
  City, N. J._


  “James H. Sterrett, affectionately called ‘Papa Jim’ by his host of
  friends, is the most liberal swimming philanthropist I ever met,
  always ready to impart his expert knowledge to the ‘other fellow.’
  He is one of the few of the old school of swimmers who has kept
  right up to date in the art. He taught me to swim all the strokes
  scientifically, and I owe much of my success as a teacher to his
  helpfulness.”

[Illustration: BREAST STROKE, SIDE VIEW.]

[Illustration: CRAWL STROKE, SIDE VIEW.]




Swimming a Necessary Part of One’s Education


Some years ago it was not so easy to get people interested in the art
of swimming and to have them realize the necessity of a knowledge
of how to keep the body afloat and to propel it through the water
by means of the arms and legs, in order to be able not only to save
one’s own life but be the means of rendering assistance to others in
time of danger and accident. Conditions have greatly changed in this
direction now, and swimming is on a strong wave of popularity; in
fact, the great mass of people of the United States, both young and
old, have taken up this pastime with so much vigor and enthusiasm
that it will not be long ere this country, as in many other things,
will lead all the nations of the world in its educational interest in
spreading this useful accomplishment, as our competitive swimmers are
now leading the world in speed swimming and skill in the water.

That swimming is healthful, splendid for development, easily acquired
and should be a part of one’s education and taught in schools as
being as necessary as reading, writing, and arithmetic, is now
generally admitted, and means have been provided in nearly all
the large cities whereby the school children are given the proper
facilities, under careful and up-to-date instruction, to bring about
the desired end.


The Simple Method

It is not our purpose in this book to go into any extended details
or give dry statistics, but to show by simple and plain talks on
the art and science of swimming and by language that is clear and
readily understood, with the assistance of various pictures, the
different positions in the water in swimming the breast stroke, the
over-arm side stroke, the double-over-arm stroke (sometimes called
the Trudgeon), and the now generally accepted and famous “crawl”
stroke, as these four movements in the water practically complete
one’s swimming education and make their possessor worthy of the title
of an expert.

There has been considerable controversy among expert swimmers and
teachers as to whether it is best to learn the crawl stroke first, or
the breast stroke, and various competitive tests have been made in
order to let the exponents of each principle prove, if possible, the
superiority of one method over the other, but no permanent deductions
have been arrived at; however, the author, aside from having decided
opinions himself in this matter, considers that where one method has
an advantage over the other, both have their good points.


Crawl Teaching Is Quickest

It is claimed that one can be taught quicker by a sort of dog-paddle,
sometimes spoken of as the crawl stroke, and we will admit this to
be so, but those who learn by this route are seldom good swimmers
until they master the other strokes, while the breast stroke as an
elementary one, although being a little harder to grasp, on account
of the co-ordination of arms and legs, gives more confidence to the
beginner, and he or she will rapidly advance from this point on, and
even in the early stages will be able to swim farther and with less
effort than by the so-called crawl method; however, if the beginner
can grasp the Trudge-crawl at the very start, the result will be much
easier and the advancement more rapid.

[Illustration: THE BREAST STROKE.

Beginning and Ending of Stroke.]

[Illustration: THE BREAST STROKE.

Count of Two, Separating Legs, Toes and Knees Pointing Out.]

[Illustration: THE CRAWL STROKE.

Head-on View, Showing Position of Arms and Legs at Beginning of
Stroke.]

[Illustration: THE CRAWL, SECOND POSITION, EXHALING UNDER WATER.]

[Illustration: THE CRAWL, THIRD POSITION, TAKING A BREATH.]

But, as we will show and explain both methods, the reader who does
not know how, can choose either one, and if he is taught by a
professional instructor, or some expert amateur coach, it matters not
which way he learns, so that he accomplishes the first object—to keep
the body afloat and propel it by means of the arms and legs.

The very first thing you want to get in your mind, and fasten it
there firmly, is the fact that there are only three things necessary
to become a good swimmer—the proper timing of the stroke, or what
experts call the alternate action or harmony (timing); breathing; and
the ability to relax; and when you have acquired these things—and
every one can master them—you will not only be able to swim well and
without effort, but go indefinite distances in the water just as
easily as walking on the land, and swim as long as your vitality will
permit and the lowered temperature of the body will allow.


The Breast Stroke

And now for the simple lessons, beginning with the breast stroke.

To swim the breast stroke the beginner lies flat on the water, being
supported by water wings, rubber life preserver, or held up in
shallow water by the hand of a friend or instructor. The body, except
the head and shoulders, is submerged a few inches under the water,
the arms and legs outstretched in a line with the body, the hands,
with palms downward, touching. The toes, knees and feet should be
pointing outward.

When beginning the stroke it is best to make the movements with three
counts. At “one” the hands are parted, describing a semi-circle,
and at “two” are brought up under the chin, the knees being
simultaneously brought up under the body, pointing outward, the legs
being separated. At “three” the hands are shot out in front of the
body and the legs whipped together, completing the full stroke, the
body being allowed to float for an instant before again beginning
the stroke, to get the benefit of the run as well as a little rest
between strokes.

At first the pupil may naturally keep the limbs tense in going
through these movements, and it is this, and holding the breath, that
tires, and not the muscular movements. But you will soon loosen up
after gaining a little confidence and you will find how easy it is to
float on and move through the water. And now comes that all-important
part of all swimming—breathing.


Breathing

Breathing plays the most important part in the art of swimming; in
fact, no one ever becomes a good swimmer unless attention is paid
to the matter of breathing, which must be done with regularity and
precision. This is especially necessary when using the advanced or
scientific strokes and much of the speed and endurance in swimming
depend on a correct performance of this part of the work. In breast
swimming, the head and face being more above the surface of the
water than in the side strokes, breathing is usually performed
through the nose alone, keeping the mouth closed in order not to take
in any water. But it is not long before those who breathe in this
fashion find out that the respiration is restricted, irregular and
jerky, and the swimmer soon gets “out of wind” and tires, wondering
why it is that he can only go such a short distance before he is
“played out.” To nothing else, so much as breathing, is due the
inability of those who can swim to keep up the speed and regularity
of movement for an indefinite period.

Annette Kellerman, the wonderful Australian woman swimmer, makes the
matter of breathing very clear when she says, “Take a quick gulp
of air through the mouth and let it ooze out slowly through the
nose.” What could be more simple in explanation? In swimming you
breathe entirely different from any other form of exercise, and you
will never swim well, easily or far, until you breathe as described
above and in unison with each stroke. It is much better to take the
quick breath through the mouth and then submerge the head and exhale
through the nose under water, for once you have mastered this you
have learned the real secret of success in swimming.

Make the stroke easy, and in proper timing, or co-ordination, breathe
regularly and with precision on each stroke, and, above all, do not
keep the limbs stiff or rigid, but relax, as swimming is not a matter
of strength or force, but skill.

Be patient and persistent and you will soon acquire an art you can
enjoy, with much physical benefit and great pleasure, until extreme
old age.

[Illustration: OVER-ARM SIDE STROKE, POSITION IN WATER.]

[Illustration: DOUBLE-OVER-ARM (TRUDGE).

After the Roll, Exhaling Under Water.]


The Over-arm Side Stroke

Having mastered the breast stroke sufficiently to feel comfortable
in the water, the pupil is now ready to learn the more advanced
swimming strokes, and the best one to take up next is the over-arm
side stroke, a method by which Joey Nuttall, of England, held all the
world’s records and won all the championship events from 100 yards to
one mile, defeating all comers and being unbeatable throughout the
world for over twenty-one years.

The over-arm side stroke is still one of the very best methods, and
is used by many of the world’s great swimmers, particularly for long
distance swimming, as it is not only very easy and comfortable, but
requires less exertion than any of the other strokes, and one can
glide along smoothly and at a good pace and keep up the movements for
an almost indefinite period.

As in many other things where greater speed is required, the over-arm
side stroke gives better pace and a longer run, because of the fact
that the body, being on the side, presents less resistance than when
on the breast, and, by minimizing the negative parts of the stroke,
we get a maximum amount of positive action, resulting in more speed,
with no greater effort.


Breast Stroke Elementary

The breast stroke is distinctly an elementary stroke, and until a
swimmer masters the over-arm side or the double over-arm strokes he
cannot be classed as a first-class performer in the water, as these
modern and up-to-date methods are now recognized by all first-class
swimmers throughout the world, both for record-making performances
as well as for all-around swimming ability. These strokes have been
experimented with and brought to a state of high proficiency in
recent years by expert swimmers, and are practical and useful in all
kinds of water and under every possible condition, requiring the
least energy and giving the best results, with little lost motion.

Before describing the over-arm side stroke, we wish to emphasize the
fact that the idea is to have a power working continuously on the
water, for as the over-arm is being drawn through the water the legs
are drawn up and the under-arm is shot forward, and when the over arm
extends the legs are brought together, and the body moves through the
water with a continuous run, and, when the stroke is properly timed,
or the swimmer acquires the alternative action, he glides along quick
and fast from the power of each stroke, without much loss of pace. It
matters not which side the swimmer lies on, as the side that comes
most natural will be found to be the better side, although some
people, being ambidextrous, can swim as easy on one side as the other.


Right Side for Illustration

For the purpose of illustrating the lesson, we will imagine the
swimmer to be on the right side. At the start of the stroke and on
the count of “one” the lower arm should be pulled steadily downward
toward the hip, but keeping it on the inside line of the body, and
not toward the back, which will keep the swimmer on his side much
like a cutter or yacht on her keel. The fingers should be kept
closed, with the thumbs touching and forming a sort of spoon-shape,
and used much like an oar in the pull through the water.

When the under-arm stroke is finished the hand should be turned
quickly, palm upward, in order to have as little resistance as
possible, and pushed rapidly forward to the point where it began.
The over-arm stroke is started as the downward part of the under-arm
stroke is finished, and should begin its downward course about six
inches in front of the face. The upper arm should be slightly bent to
work clear of the chest, with the palm and thumb pointing downward
and cuplike, to get the most from the pull.


The Pull Through

When the upper arm is about opposite the shoulder in its pull through
the water the legs should be separated for the leg stroke, and they
should be in position for giving the snappy kick when the hand leaves
the water and the kick should be completed and legs straightened out
before the upper arm is ready to begin the next stroke. The legs are
opened up and brought together simultaneously, the upper leg being
brought forward, the knee slightly bent, and the foot kept in its
ordinary position and not allowed to hang free, the lower leg being
bent backward, with the heel toward the thigh and swinging on a hinge
(so to speak), so that there is little resistance. Both feet should
be kept near to the surface of the water, except at the end of the
stroke, when the right foot dips to come just under the left.


Keep on the Side

Remember that you must keep on your side like a cutter. You must not
roll over on your breast, but keep in a straight-line position, for,
if you turn, or reach too far ahead with the upper arm, you will
throw yourself out of position and lose the easy run.

And, as in all the other strokes, remember about breathing and
relaxing, the great factors in making you swim easier, further and
better than other swimmers. As the under arm is drawn down, take the
quick breath or gulp of air through the mouth, closing the mouth and
exhaling through the nose until the completion of the stroke, and
then begin all over again. You will find that you do not have to make
any effort to keep your body afloat while on the side, therefore you
can relax more, and when you get the stroke and the breathing and
relaxing in harmony, it will be dead easy.

Persist, practice daily and do not get discouraged, for all of a
sudden it will dawn on you that you have mastered the stroke and will
soon go through the movements intuitively.


The Double-Over-arm or “Trudgeon” Stroke

Once the swimmer has acquired the over-arm side stroke, he is not
only ready but invariably ambitious to swim the double-over-arm
stroke, and this desire is but natural, as it can be readily seen
that the latter method gives an opportunity to increase one’s speed
as well as to get a more evenly balanced exercise from this form of
stroke; and here a word or two about swimming as an exercise and
for body development is in order, for it can be shown that there
is probably no other form of exercise that is better for a uniform
development of the body and which brings all the muscles into play,
including the heart and lungs, than swimming.

The exercise of swimming has the effect of toning up and quickening
the whole muscular condition, making the moving muscles pliant,
responsive, and not bunchy and hard, as in the case of some of the
heavier athletic and gymnastic pastimes.

[Illustration: HERBERT VOLLMER, N. Y. A. C., SWIMMING THE
TRUDGE-CRAWL.]

[Illustration:

  1. Position for breathing; 2. Correct position for Crawl, showing
  arched back; 3. Overhand Stroke with Crawl Kick; 4. Back Overhand
  Stroke.

Photos posed by Teddy Cann of the New York Athletic Club and
copyrighted by American Press Association, N. Y.]

[Illustration:

  1. Correct position for Swan Dive; 2. Correct stand for Race Start;
  3. This illustration is only designed to show the Crawl Stroke
  position of the hands; 4. Crawl Stroke (in action) position.

Photos posed by Teddy Cann of the New York Athletic Club and
copyrighted by American Press Association, N. Y.]

[Illustration: SWIMMING ON THE BACK, IN ACTION.]

The double-over-arm stroke is more frequently referred to as the
Trudgeon, but nowadays this name is a misnomer, as the original
Trudgeon stroke was so called after a man by that name had won an
English 100-yard championship, using the double-over-arm, or both
arms out of the water, but kicking a sort of leg motion like the
breast stroke action, a style not now approved of by modern swimmers,
because the scissors kick, as used with this stroke, made the same
way as in the over-arm side stroke, has been found to be better,
faster and more graceful in action.


The Stroke for Distance Work

Before describing the movements of the double-over-arm stroke, we
will here remark that almost all the world’s records for middle
and long-distance swimming have been made by this stroke, and some
idea of the speed attained can be formed by the following records,
all made by George Hodgson of Canada, one of the world’s greatest
distance champion swimmers, and the best exponent of this method
the writer has ever seen: 400 meters, 5 minutes 24 2-5 seconds;
1,000 meters, 14 minutes 37 seconds; 1,500 meters, 22 minutes; 1,600
meters, 23 minutes 28 1-5 seconds, and one mile, 23 minutes 34 1-2
seconds. And at the time the great swimmer made these records at the
Olympic games in 1912, he defeated all the fastest and best swimmers
and record-holders from all parts of the world, some of them using
the famous crawl stroke, thus proving himself, as well as the
stroke, to be the best in the world at that time.

While it would not be literally correct to call the modern Trudgeon
stroke a “double-over-arm-side stroke,” yet that is most nearly what
the motions of the double-over-arm approach, for you must first swim
one part of the stroke as a side-stroke movement, and then roll over
partly on the breast to get your other arm out of the water, thus
giving you more positive action and greater speed by getting both
arms out, than you would get from the single-over-arm, in which one
of the arms must be pushed under and through the water, with the
resistance such negative action entails.


Depends Upon Side

If you swim on the right side you begin the movements of the
double-over-arm stroke by diving into the water, or pushing off on
your side from the side or end of the tank, or the shore, and, when
at full length, with right hand under the water and extended beyond
the head, and the left hand pointing backward, and at the count of
“one,” bring the right hand downward, on the inside line of the body,
and not behind the back, for this movement will keep you on your side
like a cutter, while if you pull downwards and back of the body, you
will be thrown on your chest too soon and stop your run.

At the same time as the right arm is being drawn downward, and on
the same count of “one,” the left arm is thrown forward out of and
clear of the water, and at the count of “two,” the left leg is drawn
up to meet the left arm as it comes down and through the water much
like an oar, and at “three” the legs are whipped together and the
body turned partly on the breast and the right arm brought out of the
water and thrown forward, the body rolling to the right side again
and repeating the same movements. If you swim on the left side, of
course you must make the movements described to suit the opposite arm
and legs from those given in the description.


The Test of Breathing

And now you are up to the point where it is a real test of whether
you have mastered the art of breathing, for this stroke requires
regular and automatic breathing, with proper timing and precision
on each stroke, before you will be able to swim it easily and as
comfortably as the other strokes, because you cannot miss a breath or
hold your breath for any number of strokes, but must take the quick
gulp of air while on the side as the face is upturned just as you
draw the right hand down through the water, then close your mouth,
and exhale slowly through the nose while the face is under water,
until the stroke is fully completed, or, in other words, breathe in
harmony and in timing with each stroke.

The double-over-arm, because of the submerging of the face on each
stroke, and because of the forced regularity of breathing, and no
effort being required to keep the body afloat, is well adapted for
swimming in rough water, as the waves will not be so apt to dash
in your face and mouth at the wrong time, to disconcert you, and
interrupt the regularity of your breathing.

Charles B. Durborow, conceded to be the world’s greatest distance
endurance swimmer, uses the double-over-arm stroke in making all his
great long-distance swims, some of which have never been made before
or since by any other swimmer.


The Crawl Stroke

The crawl stroke is undoubtedly the greatest stroke that has ever
been invented or discovered in connection with the art of swimming,
and until its adoption and subsequent improvement by experimenting
with it until it was brought up to a high point of efficiency, the
swimmers of the world had practically reached their limit of speed
performances, having perfected the other strokes beyond further
improvement, and thus it was that they were eager to take up the
new-found method by which it has been discovered that a person can go
still faster through the water.

And now, before describing the stroke and the action of the arms
and legs when swimming the crawl, as we have done in our previous
lessons, we will tell you the secret of why this new method is so
much faster than the others, and the whole thing is a matter of
eliminating resistance, or minimizing the negative parts of the
stroke and getting a maximum amount of positive action; or, in other
words, doing the same thing as has been done in many other things to
produce greater speed—applying the maximum of power while at the same
time reducing resistance to the minimum.

The crawl stroke originated in Australia, and Dick Cavil, one of the
members of that famous family of expert swimmers, and one of the best
all-around swimmers the author has ever seen, told the writer that
his brother, “Tums,” in an argument with another swimmer as to their
relative ability, said he could tie his feet together and then beat
the other chap for a length of the pool, and when the contest came
off he made good his boast.

“Tums” Cavil always argued that the legs were not of much use to him
in fast swimming, and he believed that they hindered other swimmers
when going at top speed, because in drawing them up and separating
them they stopped the run on the stroke, and he at once started
experimenting on this theory, with the result that a new stroke was
developed and launched on the natatorial world and at once became
popular, until now it is used by all the fast swimmers of the world.

At the Olympic games in 1912, Hodgson, the Canadian swimmer, beat
all the fastest swimmers in the world at middle distance swimming,
using the double-over-arm stroke, and Duke Kahanamoku, the Hawaiian,
beat all the short distance men of the world with the crawl stroke,
swimming 100 meters (109 1-3 yards) in 61 seconds, and since then the
big bronze-skin athlete, at his home in Honolulu, swam 50 yards in 23
seconds and 100 yards in 53 1-5 seconds, which shows how very fast he
can go through the water with the crawl stroke.


The Important Point

The most important thing to remember in swimming the crawl stroke is
the fact that the body should be kept perfectly flat on the water,
the face and head partly submerged, the eyes preferably above the
water and looking straight ahead. The arms are alternately reached
out at a comfortable distance in front of the head, and on a direct
line with the body, not pointing out sideways, but, if anything,
pointing at the start of the arm stroke more nearly to the center
line of the body.

The catch on the water should be taken at the beginning of each arm
stroke, using the weight of the shoulders, without over-reaching, to
get a good leverage on the downward pull. The arms must be brought
straight down, stopping the pull about on a line parallel with the
shoulders, and in recovering, describe a long oval, making sure that
before the power of one hand is fully expended the other has taken
up the motion, that it may be continuous, for it is this regular and
steady pull of the arms, and not the thrash of the legs, that has the
most to do with propelling the crawl swimmer through the water.

Breathing while using this stroke is harder than the other strokes,
because the swimmer must not roll the body out of its straight line;
therefore, the head and shoulders must be slightly turned in order
to get the breath, which can be taken after swimming two or three
strokes, but later on, when one has mastered the movements better,
breathing should be done on each stroke, exhaling slowly under water.


The Leg Movement

The legs are moved up and down in a continuous action, and not
necessarily in co-ordination with the arms, the motions being free
from the hips and not from the knees, keeping the legs straight,
without having them bent much at the knees (a fault almost all
beginners have) and pointing the toes out straight.

However, after the swimmer has mastered the leg action, he can bend
slightly at the knees, in order to get the sort of propelling
movements necessary to help move the body in its steady pace through
the water. But remember, the legs do not play so large a part in the
crawl stroke as the arm movements, and are used mostly to keep them
afloat and accelerate the run, and the fellow who gets it into his
head that the more work and greater fuss he makes with his legs the
faster he will go, will soon find that he is retarding his movements
and not getting the full speed.

While there are definite and fixed movements for the crawl, hardly
two swimmers use the stroke exactly alike, but all of them must
nearly approach the proper position in the water, get good balance,
breathe regularly and with precision on each stroke, and relax more
in the crawl than any of the other strokes, if a clean, easy movement
through the water is desired.


The Recognized Methods of the Crawl Stroke

There are two methods of swimming the crawl stroke that are generally
accepted by expert swimmers and master coaches, the one being
referred to as the straight crawl, where the swimmer lies very flat
on the water, with but very little roll in order to breathe, and uses
a six-beat kick, which the majority think is the best method for
sprinting, say, from 50 to 220 yards, and the other being called the
Trudge-crawl, using a four-beat kick, the under leg being used with
a short scissor or Trudge kick, and the swimmer rolling more than on
the straight crawl, and the action of legs not being as fast, this
latter method is considered best for middle and longer distances.

L. deB. Handley of the New York Athletic Club, a recognized authority
on swimming matters, and a man who has had a lot to do with the
coaching of many good amateur swimmers, both men and women, and who
has spent considerable time in connection with the study of the crawl
stroke, has proposed the following suggestion in connection with the
crawl method, which the author cheerfully endorses:

“It has been my aim for several years to have universally accepted
a swimming nomenclature that would be descriptive, in as much as
possible, and I have classified the strokes under the styles of:
crawl, for a leg thrash of even scope; single Trudgeon-crawl, for
leg thrash with one major and one or more minor kicks, and double
Trudgeon-crawl, for a thrash with two major kicks (double rhythm) or
two such kicks and minor ones; then add two, or four, or six-beat,
to indicate the number of movements per full stroke. That gives to
a swimmer a pretty clear idea of a man’s stroke without further
explanation, while such names as Australian, American, rotary, etc.,
mean nothing unless every detail is added.

Swimmers who want to take up a more thorough and deeper study of the
crawl stroke than given herein, should read the “Symposium of the
Crawl,” in “Speed Swimming,” No. 36R of Spalding’s Athletic Library,
price 25 cents.

[Illustration: DUKE P. KAHANAMOKU,

Honolulu. H. I.; the Fastest Sprint Swimmer in the World.]

[Illustration: LUDY LANGER,

Los Angeles Athletic Club, California; American Champion at 440
Yards, 500 Yards, 880 Yards and One-mile Swims.]

[Illustration: H. J. HEBNER,

Illinois Athletic Club, Chicago; Back Stroke and All-Around Swimmer.]

[Illustration: GEORGE HODGSON,

Montreal A. A. C.; Winner of 400 Meters and 1.500 Meters Swims,
Olympic Games, 1912, in World’s Record Time.]




Training for Speed Swimming


There are many and various ways of training for speed swimming, and
it would require quite a volume to enumerate them all. Dr. J. K.
Shell has prepared for the writer a form of training for swimming
which not only fully meets my approval, but it is so good that it is
herewith given:

“In training the only maxim for the successful racer is, ‘Don’t do
too much.’ It is unnecessary to swim every day, nor is it useful to
go the entire distance at each immersion. The aim is to strengthen
the muscles, and have the powers and functions trained to an
excessive expenditure of power without any deleterious after effects.
The best plan for either a one hundred yards or a mile man is to swim
three days a week at the pace he expects to race, at intermediate
distances, reserving the entire distances for the same day on which
the race will take place. The first week of training should be given
to running, punching the bag, some hand ball, dumb bells, Indian
clubs, pulley weights and general gymnasium work.

“The second week commences the swimming work—go slowly, pay the
greatest attention to form, never mind speed, but get your action
fully automatic and working with a conservation of energy. Do half of
your distance three times this week.

“The third week will see you going on with much greater speed and
easier action, and now commence the regular practice of starting and
sprinting.

“Starting is but the action of a standing broad jump; there should be
but one spring, and that made at the report of the pistol. Stand in
the position taken in jumping, just as you are ready to go off. Have
the legs bent, the arms back, the body leaning forward, and when the
word is given don’t straighten up and then spring, nor swing your
arms forward and then back and off, nor look at your competitors, nor
pick your course, but spring, and spring with power and quickness
far out, get the arms in front quick, dive shallow, and get a stroke
in under water, and be sure to have your stroke ready upon reaching
the surface. These little points come in very important in a hundred
yards, and in a distance race give you an advantage of many feet
without any extra exertion; excepting that of thinking instead of
floating. This sprint and start may be practiced on the intermediate
days of swimming.

“During the third week increase your distance to three-quarters, and
endeavor to swim it clear through from start to finish, not holding
back for the sprint, but depending upon your energy and spirit to
sprint out the last 150 yards. The full distance should be swam not
later than one week before the race, and at very nearly your best
speed. Three days before the race do at your best speed three-fifths
of your distance, and rest quietly until the day of the race, doing
just enough exercise to keep yourself pliant. On the day keep
cool—don’t fret and worry. Don’t think of a race or racing until you
get on your mark, get set, and spring—and strike the water and then
swim hard and steady clear through, and swim fair and true.

“The swimmer demands plenty of sleep at night, regular and
methodical. Be in bed each night by 10:30, and sleep until morning;
do not let anything disturb you; go to bed to sleep, and sleep that
sound sleep that swimmers usually get. In the morning, take a few
quick movements, a splash off, a little walk, and a good nutritious
breakfast. In eating, use fully all seasonable vegetables, and I
would advise the use of a good modern cook’s products—except the
pastries and highly seasoned dishes. Roasts—beef, mutton and game—and
broiled steaks, filets and fish, fruit and custards, all may be
enjoyed. But eat slowly, masticate well, and have good cheer wait on
you.

“Have a friend—a trainer, a rubber or a mate—with you in training,
and never omit a good, hard, conscientious rubbing and massaging and
kneading of the muscles; let all your muscles be pliant during this
operation; and finally recollect in racing, and in your actions, to
be ‘always a gentleman.’ Don’t jockey nor scold, nor be profane, but
swim, and ‘may the best man win.’”

In this connection the writer would call the attention of every
swimmer—whether he belongs to a college or not—to the Official
Intercollegiate Swimming Guide, published annually in the Spalding
Athletic Library series (No. 361, price 10 cents) for the
Intercollegiate Swimming Association. This book contains not only
articles of interest concerning the happenings in the collegiate
swimming world, and records of same, but, each year, in addition,
contains special articles by leading authorities on some important
feature of swimming.




Touching and Turning


Touching and turning is a branch of swimming more practiced for
racing than for ordinary purposes. There are several styles of
touching and turning, but I will deal with the one most easily
mastered, and shall begin by advising the learner to practice across
the bath, from side to side, and not to be in the slightest hurry.
Master the details of the turn by slow motions, nor need there be any
desire to lengthen the push until one knows that he is performing
all the motions perfectly. We assume that the pupil is lying on the
right side. He must, therefore, when about three feet from the end
of wall of the bath, have finished the progressive movements of the
left hand, which, instead of being put into the water again to renew
the stroke, must be reached forward in advance of the head until it
touches the wall immediately above the water mark. The palm of the
hand is then placed flat against the side of the bath, the hand being
in a horizontal line, with the fingers pointing to the right, which
is the direction one will turn to. The little finger is uppermost,
and the thumb downward. This done, the body is close to the side of
the wall, the knees are now bent, the body turned around by pushing
with the hand, that is on the solid wall, until the feet are pressing
on the wall and directly below this hand, but, of course, under the
surface of the water. The whole body is now drawn up or crouched
together, and is turned, as it were, on its axis. It is under water,
head and all. The soles of both feet are placed hard against the
wall, the hands put together in front of the head, which is kept
between the arms, and the position of the body and limbs should be
straight, with the legs crouched up. Then, by a strong movement
of the legs, the body is pushed off from the side as if shot from
a catapult and straightened out. Its position, when lying on the
push, is the same as when lying still, in plunging. From nine to
fifteen feet is the distance generally covered by the push off before
renewing the stroke. One must be especially careful to guard against
pushing off, even to the smallest extent, stronger with one foot than
the other, else a slip may take place on the smooth tile work, and
that means a loss of perhaps a yard or two, and, in the case of a
competition, puts the swimmer off his course, or station, and bumping
against another swimmer and fouling are likely to occur.




Ornamental Swimming


If there is any one thing more than another in connection with the
art of swimming that will show that a person has mastered the watery
element and is at ease at all times in their foster sphere, it is
a knowledge of ornamental swimming. To be able to successfully and
correctly make any kind of a dive, to float in various positions
at will and to perform the multitudinous natatorial feats that are
possible, is an accomplishment that stamps the performer an expert.
We will, therefore, suppose that those who are about to essay
these difficult swimming movements have passed the elementary and
intermediate stages and have the ability to float well. Without
a knowledge of floating, or at least the ability to control the
buoyancy of the body when placed in all manner of positions, it will
be almost impossible to make any success of ornamental swimming. Many
of the movements that seem remarkable to the uninitiated, however,
are not really hard at all, but can be accomplished with practice, by
being persistent and patient until finally acquired.

Among the feats that are at all times interesting and those that
stamp the swimmer as being clever, are porpoise swimming; sculling
on the back, using hands only; the running header; plunging, feet
foremost; the sitting jump; imitation of a torpedo; the back dive;
revolving; the twister; back somersault; marching on the water; the
propeller, and imitation of a bicycle rider.




Floating


Most people can float in salt water, no matter what may be their
build. In learning, the first movement is to gradually throw the body
on the back, arching the spine, keeping the chest well inflated,
crossing the arms over and back on the head, the thumbs locked
or fingers touching, which latter movement tends to increase the
expansion of the chest and thus make the body more floatable. If the
legs are kept straight out and together the beginner will find that
their weight in this position, in most cases, has a tendency to sink
the body. This can be overcome by drawing up the lower limbs and
extending them slightly apart and keeping them bent, which will have
the effect of more evenly balancing the body, and then, later on,
when the swimmer masters control of the breathing, so that the lungs
can be kept partly inflated all the time, he will find that the legs
can be gradually extended until they are straight, when the position
in the water will be more graceful. Because of their lighter bony
structure and increased tissue, women learn to float easier than men,
while stout persons, being more floatable, master floating quicker
than slim people. But the latter need not despair of learning, for
the best floating and the most graceful work I have ever seen of this
kind has been performed by comparatively slim people, who have caught
on to the proper equipoise of the body and overcome the tendency
of the legs to sink. Floating does not properly belong to the
elementary part of swimming, as there is considerable skill required
and much practice needed before those who do not float naturally can
accomplish the art; but, as the ability to float means so much in
ornamental and scientific swimming, the novice is advised to learn to
float as soon as possible. Double floating is much easier than single
floating, as each of the two performers aids the other in supporting
the feet and lower limbs, the parts that have a tendency to sink.

At the seashore nothing can be more pleasant than to go out beyond
the breakers and float on the back and be buoyed up and down by the
hidden power of the sea, and if one is tired from battling with the
strong waves, it is only necessary to turn over on the back, a little
farther out, on the long swell of the big rollers, and get thoroughly
rested before coming in again.

[Illustration: CHARLES B. DURBOROW.

Of Riverton, N. J.; the World’s Greatest Long-Distance Endurance
Swimmer.]

[Illustration: Ludy Langer, Los Angeles A. C.; Teddy Cann, N. Y. A.
C.; Herbert Vollmer, N. Y. A. C.

THREE OF THE WORLD’S GREATEST SWIMMERS AND RECORD-HOLDERS.]

[Illustration: LEO HANDY,

Brookline (Mass.) High School. Greatest Scholastic Speed Swimmer in
the World. 100 Yards, 56 2-5s.; 220 Yards, 2m. 29 3-5s. Princeton, N.
J., February 12, 1916.]

[Illustration: NORMAN ROSS,

  Stanford University, California; 20 years of age (1916); 6 feet 1
  inch; 207 pounds. 50 yards, 24 2-5 seconds; 100 yards, 56 seconds;
  220 yards, 2 minutes 21 3-5 seconds; one mile, 23 minutes 22
  seconds; 150 yards on back, 1 minute 56 seconds; plunge, 65 feet.]




Diving


Shallow Dive

Diving is a necessary part of a swimmer’s knowledge, and once the
learner has mastered the simple strokes, there is but one way to
enter the water—head first. What is known as the low or shallow
dive is not only the best for the beginner, but is useful when one
advances to the racing stage in their experience, while being the
easiest to learn. To make a good dive, stand perfectly erect, with
the hands first placed at the sides of the body, the position being
the same as you would assume when making a broad jump. Then bend the
legs slightly, draw the arms back of the body and spring forward,
getting the arms in front of the head, palms downward, the thumbs
touching, entering the water with a shallow dive, keeping the feet
and legs close together, without bending at the knees while entering
the water. As soon as you make the plunge point the hands upward and
the body will come to the surface at once, inclining always as the
hands are pointed; for, if you should point the hands downward, then
the body would descend. To learn to dive, a little confidence is
needed more than anything else, and after you have made your first
effort, which, on account of timidity, is usually a little awkward,
it will be a matter of a short time only when you will catch on to
the idea, after which you will never think of jumping in the water,
the pleasure and sensation attending a dive always being fascinating.
Of course, there are other forms of diving, such as the high dive,
running header, etc.; but these can be mastered later on, when the
pupil has advanced to a higher point in the art, when they will be
found to be easy of accomplishment, and you will be ambitious to
excel in all the various ornamental and difficult water feats of the
expert swimmer.


Running Header

Probably the most interesting kind of a dive is known as the running
header. This kind of a plunge admits of considerable artistic
execution and finish, and to see a good diver run and spring upward
and forward into the air and then poise and control the body, turning
it in such a manner as to enter the water gracefully, keeping all
the limbs rigid and cutting the water sharply like a knife, without
making any splash, is a great treat. The running header is usually
made from a spring-board, extending over the water or from the end
of the bath. The swimmer takes a short run, similar to that taken by
a high or broad jumper, in order to give sufficient impetus or force
to the springing or forward movement. Then soaring upward and outward
he shoots through the air, keeping the body straight until the
declining turn toward the water is made, when a sudden twist of the
body is given and the diver enters the water in a slanting position,
keeping the upper and lower limbs straight and close together, the
arms extended beyond the head, with the palms of the hands or fingers
touching in a wedge-like manner.


Back Dive

The back dive is always an interesting swimming feat. It brings
into play considerable gymnastic ability, but, on account of the
confidence the performer has as to the certainty that the water will
not hurt him much, barring a slight sting to the flesh, should he
come down flat on his back, it does not require so much courage, in
attempting the first trial, as tumbling on land, in which the back
dive may be in a measure likened. While it is possible to make a
good back dive from a rigid base, it can be more artistically made
from the springing board. The diver stands erect, with his back
towards the water. The hands are first held down to and close by the
side. The person stands on the edge of the pool on the diving board,
resting on the toes alone, the rest of the feet extended over the
water. At the movement of making the spring, the diver lowers the
body by bending the knees, while at the same time he extends his arms
back of the body and then by a quick and sudden movement brings them
forward, simultaneously with throwing the head back and entering the
water very much the same as the forward dive. When properly done, the
back dive is a beautiful method of entering the water.


Diving Feet Foremost

To enter the water, diving feet foremost, is a difficult thing to
do, but when such a plunge is nicely made it usually comes in for a
good share of merited approval. Most of the ornamental and difficult
swimming movements are usually performed in tanks or at swimming
gatherings, where there is an audience, and the spectators, who
know very little about scientific strokes, are interested, amused
and entertained by these other performances, among which none ranks
higher than plunging feet foremost. As in other forms of diving and
plunging, the swimmer stands on the edge of the pool or starting
station, and, taking the usual breath, leaps outward, feet foremost,
much like jumping in the water, throwing the arms behind and over the
head and entering the water feet first, instead of head first. The
body must be well thrown back, and the legs straightened and kept
perfectly rigid while entering the water. One must jump well out and
be sure to judge the distance safely in order that there be no danger
of striking the upper part of the body on the ledge of the bath, pier
or wharf, as the case may be.

The number of ornamental feats in swimming is almost unlimited,
according to the ability and ingenuity of the performer; but, in
addition to the above-described movements, such figures as porpoise
swimming, where the expert describes, by going under and over the
water, the swimming of a porpoise; imitation of a torpedo, the
head and body being submerged and the feet above the water, the
swimmer propelling himself with the hands, the feet alone showing
above the water; the back and front somersaults, which are really
swimming gymnastics; sculling on the back, using feet and hands
only; imitation of a bicycle rider, etc., etc., all of which can be
mastered by a clever swimmer with practice.


The Propeller

To perform the propelling trick it is necessary that the swimmer be
able to float well, for by that means the body is supported in the
water, while the hands, extended beyond the head, the back of the
hands pointing downwards, propel the swimmer, feet foremost, through
the water. Place the body on or near the surface of the water as
possible, lying on the back, the feet and legs fully extended and
close together, the hands beyond the head, also in a straight line.
Then, by a vigorous sculling movement of the hands against the water,
the body is sent gradually but steadily forward, the quick action
of the hands against the water having the same effect in driving
the body forward as the propeller of a boat. Some pretty turning
movements like the directing of the course of a boat with a rudder
can be made by propelling with one hand only or each alternately, as
the case may be, as, by sculling with the right hand, the body will
glide or take an opposite course, while the left hand movement will
direct to the right.


Marching on the Water

Until one sees the swimmer march on the water its title is somewhat
misleading. It is not a difficult method of progression through the
water, after one catches on to the idea. Place yourself in a floating
position, with the arms folded across the breast or the hands crossed
back of the head, with the fingers locked. Then by bending the knees
and drawing up the legs slowly, one after the other, keeping the toes
pointed straight out in the upward movement, so as to have as little
resistance as possible against the water. Straighten out the limb,
turning the toes upward toward the knee, making a downward stroke
with the leg, bringing the calf against the water with pressure
enough to draw the body along. The upward, or negative movement,
as we said before, must be slowly executed, while the downward, or
positive movement, should be performed with some force against the
water, the locomotion, feet foremost, the alternate action being the
same as in walking. As it is not possible to get much power from the
positive movements, marching on the water is therefore not a rapid
means of gliding along.


Swimming on the Back

Swimming on the back is one of the simplest of the natatorial
exercises, and one of the easiest methods to learn, besides being
absolutely necessary in life-saving, as well as useful as a means
of resting after swimming a long while on the breast or side. The
movements of the legs are very much the same as in the breast stroke,
except that the knees are kept farther apart. The best way to learn
to swim on the back is to place yourself in the water on the back,
the same as you would when floating. This position can be easily
attained by holding the arms straight down close to the sides,
the hands pointing toward the feet, and by giving a few sculling
movements with the hands, you will at once get into a good floating
position. Now slowly open the legs apart, while at the same time
extending the arms beyond the head and bring the legs together with a
vigorous kick, holding the arms beyond the head for an instant until
all the momentum from the kick is expended. At the second movement
the arms are brought back to their former position, describing an arc
and catching the water with the palms of the hands somewhat like an
oar, which helps to send the swimmer ahead, repeating the movements
as before.

When tired, swimming on the back is useful as a means of resting the
muscles used in the other strokes.




Long-Distance Endurance Swimming


American swimmers have made some wonderful strides in long-distance
swimming and tests of endurance in the past few years, until now our
records over distance and time immersions stand out prominently among
the world’s greatest watermen.

Over the very long and tiresome routes our swimmers use various
strokes, some of them relying on the breast stroke, others using the
over-arm side stroke, but most of them stick to the double-over-arm
stroke (sometimes called the Trudgeon), the latter method affording
an opportunity for putting more continuous power to the stroke, which
makes for greater speed; besides, this method makes the swimmer
breathe regularly and with precision on each stroke and is useful in
both rough and smooth water.

Space will not admit of recounting the numerous performances made by
the various distance swimmers of this country, but all the leading
record authorities and writers on swimming have agreed on Charles B.
Durborow of Riverton, N. J., the big Philadelphia bank clerk, as the
foremost long-distance and greatest mileage swimmer in the world.

Durborow is thirty-four years old (1916); weight, 210 pounds; height,
6 feet; swims the double-over-arm stroke, and has been swimming since
1907. He swims about 600 miles a year, and has covered over 5,000
miles in ten years. In his training, particularly before he begins
his very long swims, he does a lot of rowing over long routes, and
generally rows about 2,000 miles a year. He is the only swimmer who
has ultimately conquered every swim he ever tried. He never takes any
nourishment during a swim, and is always at his work the next day
after a big feat, none the worse for wear.

Among the hundreds of big swims made by Durborow, the following
record of ten of his greatest performances, some of which have never
been equalled by another swimmer, stamp him as the leading distance
swimmer in the world:

  Thirty-four miles, 12 hours and 44 minutes, from Arch Street wharf,
  Philadelphia, to one mile below Market Street wharf, Chester, and
  return to Washington Avenue wharf, Philadelphia, Delaware River,
  July 10, 1910.

  Ten miles, 7 hours and 59 minutes, from Flat Rock Dam to
  Conshohocken and return, Schuylkill River, July 24, 1910.

  Twelve miles, 5 hours and 53 minutes, from the million-dollar pier,
  Atlantic City, N. J., across the mouth of Great Egg Harbor Bay,
  over the bar to the beach, at Tenth Street, Ocean City, N. J., in
  Atlantic Ocean, June 25, 1911.

  Forty-two and forty-three-one-hundredths miles, 14 hours, 15
  minutes and 31 seconds, from Cape May, N. J., across the mouth of
  Delaware Bay to Broadkill Shoals, Delaware, Atlantic Ocean and
  Delaware Bay, July 1, 1912.

  Thirteen miles, 8 hours, 12 minutes and 13 seconds, from the
  Charlestown Bridge to Boston Light, Boston Harbor, July 27, 1913.

  Thirty-two and one-half miles, 12 hours and 52 minutes, from Walnut
  Street, Philadelphia, to one-eighth of a mile below Market Street,
  Chester, Pa., and return to Washington Avenue, Philadelphia,
  Delaware River, June 27, 1914.

  Twenty-two miles, 8 hours and 46 minutes, from the Battery, New
  York City, to Sandy Hook Beacon, Sandy Hook, N. J., New York
  Harbor, July 19, 1914.

  Twenty-six miles, 9 hours and 8 minutes, from Riverton, N. J., to
  Bristol, Pa., and return to Riverton, N. J., upper Delaware River,
  May 28, 1916.

  Twenty-two miles, 8 hours and 42 minutes, from Cape Charles, Va.,
  across the mouth of Chesapeake Bay to Cape Henry, Va., Atlantic
  Ocean (swam outside the capes), June 23-24, 1916.

  Thirty-six and one-half miles, 13 hours and 30 minutes, from Market
  Street, Chester, Pa., to Penn Treaty Park, Philadelphia, and return
  to Market Street, Chester, Pa., and then on the third tide to
  Eddystone, Pa., Delaware River, September 9-10, 1916.

[Illustration: OLGA DORFNER.

Philadelphia Turngemeinde; American Champion Sprint Swimmer and
Record-holder.]

[Illustration: CLAIRE GALLIGAN.

New Rochelle, N. Y.; American Champion Middle-Distance Swimmer and
Record-holder.]

[Illustration:

  1. Gertrude Artelt, P. T. G.; 2.. Helen Pennepacker, P. T. G.;
  Middle Atlantic champion diver; 3. Elizabeth Becker, P. T. G.; 4.
  Josephine Bartlett, Metropolitan champion diver.

A QUARTETTE OF FAST GIRL SWIMMERS AND DIVERS.]

[Illustration:

  Left to right—Bessie Ryan, fast Philadelphia swimmer and frequent
  prize-winner; Florence McLoughlin, First Regiment (Philadelphia),
  America’s greatest juvenile swimmer; Anna C. Kean, Lansdowne, Pa.,
  Ocean City to Atlantic City (in sea), 8h. 28m., and 26 miles,
  Delaware River, 11h. 8m. 41 2-5s.]




Women and Girl Swimmers


Probably no other form of exercise or competitive sport among women
and girls has advanced so rapidly in the United States as that of
swimming, and with the recognition of women swimmers by registration
in the Amateur Athletic Union, contests and championship events have
been held in various cities throughout the United States, from the
Atlantic to the Pacific, with the result that our women swimmers are
rapidly coming to the front in speed swimming, and their records at
various distances are very close to the best world’s marks for those
of their sex.

Women make better swimmers than men, when equally skilled in the art,
and while they do not quite approach the speed times of the men,
because of the difference in muscular strength and power, they are
more graceful than men in the water, practice more frequently, make
less fuss about it, and get a lot of physical benefit from their
favorite pastime.

A woman, being of lighter bony structure, with more flesh than a man
in proportion to her size and weight, and with a different physical
formation of body, gets a better equipoise in the water, with the
result that most all women float naturally; in fact, after they learn
to swim, very few of them have to make any effort to stay on top
of the water, which gives them a confidence not usually seen among
men swimmers; and, as nature has endowed them with a much better
circulation than men, they are able to stay in the water and stand a
lower temperature than the opposite sex without getting chilled.

Miss Olga Dorfner of the Philadelphia Turngemeinde has shown herself
to be the fastest short-distance speed swimmer in this country in
contests up to 220 yards, at which distances she has defeated all
comers, and she holds the American records over these routes. She
swims an excellent crawl stroke, and the following times, most of
them American records for women, shows her top class as a sprint
swimmer: 40 yards, 22 seconds; 50 yards, 29 seconds; 60 yards, 39
seconds; 80 yards, 53 seconds; 100 yards, 1 minute 8 4-5 seconds; 220
yards, 3 minutes 5 1-5 seconds.

Miss Claire Galligan, of New Rochelle, is the best middle distance
swimmer among our girls, having defeated all the other aspiring
contestants in races over 220 yards. Miss Galligan has swam 100
yards in 1 minute 9 seconds; 220 yards in 3 minutes 4 1-5 seconds;
440 yards in 7 minutes 6 3-5 seconds; half mile in 15 minutes 15
2-5 seconds, and one mile in 31 minutes 19 3-5 seconds. She uses a
four-beat Trudgeon-crawl stroke, and is almost certain to break many
more women’s swimming records, as she is increasing in speed all the
time.

Gertrude Artelt, Philadelphia Turngemeinde, is coming on fast at
sprint swimming, having now a record of 1 minute 13 2-5 seconds for
100 yards, while her team-mate, Elizabeth Becker, from the same
organization, has covered 220 yards in a race in 3 minutes 13 1-5
seconds, with very fast times for the shorter distances.

Bessie Ryan of the First Regiment Swimming Pool, Philadelphia, is
a coming fast swimmer who invariably wins a prize every time she
competes. Her 100 yards time is 1 minute 15 seconds, her 220 yards 3
minutes 35 seconds, and all this in her first year of competition.

Florence McLaughlin of the First Regiment Swimming Pool,
Philadelphia, was the most remarkable juvenile swimmer and diver in
this country and her many records and prizes over all distances stamp
her as a great swimmer.

Miss Anna C. Kean of Lansdowne, Pa., swam from Ocean City to Atlantic
City, 12 miles in the sea, August 21, 1916, in 8 hours and 28
minutes, and on September 18, 1916, swam 26 miles in the Delaware
River in 11 hours 8 minutes 41 3-5 seconds, this performance being
the longest swim ever made by a woman in the world under same
conditions.




Modern Methods of Life-Saving


It is often remarked by those who have a very limited knowledge of
swimming matters, that it is the good swimmer who gets drowned.
This is a very erroneous impression and one that will not bear
investigation.

It is the fellow who thinks he is a good swimmer and who usually
tries some fool-hardy stunt which he is not competent to undertake,
who loses his life. Besides, this sort of chap may be a fair swimmer,
but he does not get any practice, and probably overeats before going
into the water, and goes far out beyond his depth, forgetting that
he has to come back again, and when his muscles and wind, which are
not accustomed to the extra tax, give out, loses his head, gulps a
big shipment of water, and then the excitement strangles him and
brings on heart-failure and he is gone for good. He is not literally
drowned, he is shocked to death, for I mean to say it, and most
medical men and other experts competent to judge will bear out my
statement when I tell you that there are very few people drowned in
the water, and that most of the deaths occur from heart-failure, as I
have stated above, while the fact that many of the drowning cases in
the surf are found floating face down, show that the shock has closed
up the epiglottis, and no water has penetrated the stomach or lungs.

But until everyone who attends school is taught to swim and be
competent to take care of themselves in the water under all
conditions, life-saving must be part of the educational work of
swimming, in fact, made a strong feature of natatorial instruction;
therefore, it behooves the skilled swimmer to learn the best ways to
approach a person in the water who may need help, and better still,
to know how to release one’s self from the death-grip of a drowning
person.

[Illustration: LIFE-SAVING—FRONT STRANGLE HOLD, HELD AT DISTANCE.]

[Illustration: LIFE-SAVING—FRONT STRANGLE HOLD, HELD CLOSE.]

[Illustration: LIFE-SAVING—BACK STRANGLE HOLD.]

[Illustration: LIFE-SAVING—PITINOFF CARRY.]

[Illustration: LIFE-SAVING—HEAD AND CHIN CARRY.]

[Illustration: LIFE-SAVING—ARM RESCUE.]

[Illustration: LIFE-SAVING—SCHAEFER METHOD OF RESUSCITATION.]

The chief don’t that I would emphasize is that, unless you are a good
swimmer yourself, and know how to keep cool in times of excitement
such as when a boat overturns, or some one is suddenly precipitated
in the water, you had better not attempt a rescue, for, while it is
very commendable to be a hero, unless you know what you are about,
two people will lose their lives instead of one. However, if you
are cool, and can swim well, to approach a person in the right way,
break any hold they may take on you, and tow them into shore and out
of danger, is but a simple task, although if you have to go quite
a distance, it may tire you a lot, but you will have that glorious
satisfaction of having saved a life of a fellow brother.

In attempting a rescue, never approach a person from in front, if you
can possibly avoid it, and you invariably can, unless you are in a
boat with them and you are suddenly thrown in the water, and coming
up near someone they may grasp you before you have time to get back
of them. Always get back of them and then it will be easy to grasp
them by the various holds that are herein described, and by telling
them to keep cool, easily tow them to shore.

The most likely grip to be taken by the drowning person is for them
to grasp you by the wrists, if in front of them. This is a very easy
hold to break, for, by turning your elbows up suddenly and your hands
down and outward, they will have to release because they have no
clutch on you but the thumb-hold. After effecting the releases, you
can turn the person around, so you will be back of them and then
bring them in by the holds here explained and illustrated.

A most dangerous hold is for the person to grasp you around the neck
with both arms, and clutching you tight, draw you very close to them
in a strangle-hold. When this hold is taken, you must put your right
arm under their left shoulder, placing your thumb and forefinger
tightly over their nose and shutting off the wind, while you press
your left hand against his back, drawing him to you and pushing his
head back. Be strong and rough about it if necessary, as you will not
hurt him, and very soon, because he cannot get his breath, he will
release his hold, and then you must turn him around quickly on his
back and the rest will be easy, especially if you assure him that
there is no danger if he will not try to struggle.

Another hold that looks as if it might be very hard to break is the
back strangle-hold, where the excited one grasps you from behind
around the neck with both arms. You must at once take hold of both of
his hands with your hands, throw your head back with all the force
you can, knocking him a hard blow on the nose with the back of your
head, and then by ducking your head down under water, you will be
able to get free, but you must keep hold of one of his hands in order
to turn him around as in the other holds, in order not to lose your
grip so you can tow him to safety.

Towing the subject to shore, of course, is much easier than breaking
the holds. One of the very easy methods is to grasp the person by
the hair of the head, unless he be bald, and as the body is easy to
carry this way and floats well, you can use both your lower limbs and
one arm to tow him to shore or to the upturned boat or canoe, if the
latter is near, for it is not wise to go further than necessary, for
someone will be very apt to come to your assistance if you hold on to
the craft, and numerous cases are on record of the rescuer becoming
exhausted when having to carry a person very far.

If you are swimming with a friend or near another person who gets
tired, it is the easiest thing in the world to help him, for all you
have to do is to ask him to place his forefingers of both hands upon
your shoulders, he lying on his back, his feet kept close together
and between your legs, and then you swim the breast stroke, and as
you have the use of all your limbs, the person will be very easy to
carry for a long distance, providing you swim easy and slowly and do
not try to hurry.

Another method of carrying is by the neck and arm hold, where you
turn the person on their side, grasping them with one arm around
and under the neck and over their shoulder, to prevent them from
struggling, and you can then swim on your side, using one arm under
water and getting a side-stroke kick, having the person entirely
under your control, in a case where he might be struggling to release
himself.

More people’s lives are now saved annually than at any time before in
the world’s history, on account of the advanced ideas now in vogue in
connection with the resuscitation of the apparently drowned, and with
the latest and best method now used, called the Schaefer method, it
is easier to bring the person who is recovered from the water, when
not submerged too long, back again to life by producing artificial
respiration, and restoring circulation, if life is not already
extinct.

As soon as the person’s body is recovered, he is placed face down on
the beach or some flat place, preferably with the head at the lowest
point, in order that any water that may be in the stomach or lungs
will be more readily gotten out. The face is turned to one side, the
tongue pulled out and fastened by a rubber band, a string, or held
out by an assistant, so it will stay out and not fall back again
into the mouth and close up the passage-way. The hands are extended
straight out beyond the head. The operator kneels down on one knee,
grasps the sides of the body just below the lower ribs, making
pressure steadily and firmly inwards and upwards, and releasing
suddenly, the idea being to make the lungs work something like a
rubber ball would act after pressure and on sudden release, or in
other words producing an artificial gasp, for the purpose of bringing
back respiration, for when this is accomplished, the circulation will
be restored, and by keeping the patient warm and rubbing the limbs
you will be able to bring the apparently dead back to life.

The work of the operator must not be too quickly done, but timed in
keeping with your own or natural breathing, and it is better to have
another person ready to take up the work when you are tired and thus
work in relays, persisting for a long time if necessary, or until
medical help can be obtained, for as long as there is life in the
body, even though animation be suspended, there is hope.

[Illustration: HIGH DIVE—PLAIN HEADER.]

[Illustration: Backward header.]

[Illustration: Backward somersault.]

HIGH DIVE.

[Illustration: HIGH DIVE—ARMSTAND WITH HEADER.]

[Illustration: HIGH DIVE—ARMSTAND WITH OVERBACK.]




Competitive Diving


The illustrations of various styles of diving have been taken from
the prospectus issued for the benefit of intending competitors at the
last Olympic Games, held at Stockholm, Sweden, in 1912. The text for
the regulation of diving contests has been taken bodily from Rule 55
of the Amateur Athletic Union handbook.

The Amateur Athletic Union is the governing body of amateur athletic
sport in the United States and every amateur swimmer who expects
to enter in races or competition of any kind should be registered
with his local association of the Amateur Athletic Union in order to
prevent being disqualified.


Regulations for Diving Competitions

_Instruction to Judges._ In making awards for points for each dive
the judges shall have regard to the character of the respective dive
to be performed, and shall take into consideration: The manner of the
dive (proper carriage, confidence and form), the force and speed of
the dive, the entrance into the water and how the run or take-off is
performed. When judging the carriage the individuality of the diver
should be taken into consideration. The bearing in the air should be
natural, easy, supple and graceful. When performing plain head dives,
the head should be erect, back hollowed, legs closed with feet
turned back, arms supple and fingers closed. The start should be made
gracefully, with confidence and in a bold manner; in running dives
the force and energy imparted should be considered. The entrance into
the water should be made without splashing and with good carriage of
the body.

For each dive each judge shall award points according to the
following scale:

                         Points.
  Unsuccessful attempt      0
  Bad dive                  3
  Fair dive                 6
  Good dive                 8
  Excellent dive           10

The judges may mark points and half points between those mentioned
in the above scale, but 10 shall be the highest possible that can be
awarded by any judge.

An unsuccessful attempt is one in which the competitor has failed to
perform the dive nominated.

In all jackknife dives the competitor should enter the water within
six feet from the take-off.

All head dives with arms by sides are ruled out.

Swallow and all other forms of straight front dives are to be
considered as plain front dives.

In all somersaults or jackknife dives with twists, the somersaults or
jackknives must be completed before twisting.

Under observation of the foregoing conditions and instructions in
making their respective awards each judge shall:

  a. Write down his points for each dive performed by each competitor
  according to the scale of points named in point table above.

  b. The points awarded by him for each voluntary dive shall be
  multiplied by the points allowed for the degree of difficulty in
  each case as specified in the following diving tables.

  c. After the total of points for each competitor has been found and
  checked as being correct, each judge shall place the competitors in
  the order in which they finish on his diving card. He shall give
  1, to the diver scoring the greatest number of points; 2, to the
  diver scoring the second greatest number of points, etc. If two
  competitors score the same number of points their place numbers
  shall be added and each given one-half. For instance, if two
  competitors receive the same number of points, which is the second
  largest on the diving card of a judge, their place numbers 2 and 3
  shall be added, and each competitor shall receive 2½, and the next
  following competitor shall receive the number 4. The place numbers
  given to the respective competitors by each of the judges shall be
  added together and the competitor showing the lowest total of place
  numbers shall be declared the winner. In case of a tie the point
  totals of all the judges shall be added together and the competitor
  whose total of points is greatest shall be the winner of the tie.

A list of voluntary dives shall be submitted by each competitor
to the judges in writing before the beginning of the competition.
Changes in the list of voluntary dives are not permitted. No
competitor shall be permitted to repeat any of his dives.

The Referee must ascertain before the beginning of a competition that
the depth of the water is sufficient to insure the safety of the
competitors.

Competitions or exhibitions of diving from a greater height than 34
feet are prohibited.

The conditions of a diving competition, namely, height of board,
number of voluntary and compulsory dives, and the character of the
latter, must be stated in entry blanks.

_Fancy Diving from the Springboard._ The board shall have a length of
13 feet and shall be 20 inches wide and shall be of the usual elastic
character.

In championship meetings the height of the board from the surface of
the water shall be not less than 9 feet 6 inches, nor more than 11
feet.

The program for championships shall consist of the following dives:
Running front dive, back dive, running forward jackknife, back
jackknife and six voluntary dives selected from the following table:

                                                    Standing.  Running.
   1—Backward spring and forward dive (half twist)      1.4
   2—Backward spring and backward dive (full twist)     2.0
   3—Forward spring with half twist and backward dive   1.5       1.6
   4—Forward spring with full twist and forward dive    1.8       1.8
   5—Forward somersault                                 1.5       1.5
   6—Forward 1½ somersault                              1.6       1.6
   7—Backward somersault                                1.5
   8—Backward 1½ somersault                             2.2
   9—Forward double somersault                          1.9       1.9
  10—Backward double somersault                         1.9       1.9
  11—Backward spring and forward somersault             1.7
  12—Backward spring and 1½ forward somersault          2.0
  13—Forward somersault with half twist                 1.6       1.6
  14—Forward 1½ somersault with half twist              2.2       2.2
  15—Forward 2½ somersault                              2.3       2.3
  16—Flying Dutchman (forward spring with backward
        dive)                                           1.8       1.9
  17—Flying Dutchman somersault (forward spring with
        backward somersault)                            1.7       1.7
  18—Flying Dutchman 1½ somersault                      2.4       2.4
  19—Flying Dutchman with half twist                    1.7       1.7
  20—Handstand dive                                     1.4
  21—Handstand dive with somersault                     1.7
  22—Handspring dive with somersault                    1.6       1.6
  23—Jackknife forward                                  1.5       1.5
  24—Jackknife backward                                 1.5
  25—Jackknife forward with half twist and back dive    1.8       1.9
  26—Jackknife forward with full twist and forward dive 2.2       2.2
  27—Jackknife backward with half twist and forward
        dive                                            1.9
  28—Jackknife backward with full twist and backward
        dive                                            2.3
  29—Backward dive                                      1.5

In competitions where a lower board is used, the board shall be not
less than 2 feet 6 inches or more than 4 feet from the surface of the
water and the voluntary dives shall be selected from the following
table:

                                                    Standing.  Running.
   1—Backward spring and forward dive (half twist)      1.4
   2—Backward spring and backward dive (full twist)     1.9
   3—Forward spring and backward dive (half twist)      1.5       1.6
   4—Forward spring and forward dive (full twist)       1.8       1.8
   5—Forward somersault                                 1.5       1.5
   6—Forward 1½ somersault                              1.8       1.7
   7—Forward double somersault                          2.2       1.9
   8—Backward somersault                                1.5
   9—Backward 1½ somersault                             2.2
  10—Backward double somersault                         2.2
  11—Backward spring and forward somersault             1.9
  12—Flying Dutchman (forward spring and backward
        dive)                                           1.7       1.8
  13—Flying Dutchman somersault (forward spring and
        backward somersault)                            1.8       1.8
  14—Handstand                                          1.2
  15—Jackknife forward                                  1.4       1.5
  16—Jackknife backward                                 1.5
  17—Jackknife forward and half twist                   1.8       1.9
  18—Jackknife forward and full twist                   2.2       2.2
  19—Jackknife backward and half twist                  1.9
  20—Jackknife backward and full twist                  2.2
  21—Backward dive                                      1.5

_High Diving from a Firm Take-off._ For high diving competitions from
a firm take-off the platforms shall be 7 feet wide, fixed, free from
spring and placed at two heights, the first not less than 14 feet and
not more than 16 feet and the second not less than 24 feet and not
more than 27 feet above the surface of the water.

The program for championships shall consist of two compulsory dives
from the lower platform, namely, one plain back dive and one
backward somersault; and two from the high platform, one running
plain dive and one standing plain dive, and six voluntary dives,
to be performed from the high platform and to be selected from the
following table:

                                                    Standing.  Running.
   1—Backward spring and forward dive with half twist   1.4
   2—Forward spring and backward dive with half twist   1.6       1.7
   3—Forward spring and forward dive with full twist    1.9       1.9
   4—Backward spring and backward dive with full twist  2.1
   5—Armstand                                           1.6
   6—Armstand and somersault                            1.5
   7—Armstand backward fall dive                        2.1
   8—Armstand with double somersault                    2.2
   9—Backward dive                                      2.1
  10—Backward somersault                                1.7
  11—Forward somersault                                 2.1       2.1
  12—Forward 1½ somersault                              1.9       1.9
  13—Forward double somersault                          2.2       2.2
  14—Forward 2½ somersault                              2.3       2.3
  15—Backward 1½ somersault                             2.4
  16—Backward double somersault                         2.1
  17—Forward somersault with half twist                 2.1       2.1
  18—Forward 1½ somersault with half twist              2.2       2.2
  19—Backward spring and forward somersault             1.8
  20—Backward spring and forward 1½ somersault          2.0
  21—Flying Dutchman                                    2.1       2.2
  22—Flying Dutchman somersault                         1.9       1.9
  23—Flying Dutchman 1½ somersault                      2.5       2.5
  24—Flying Dutchman double somersault                  2.3       2.3
  25—Flying Dutchman with half twist                    1.8       1.8
  26—Jackknife forward                                  1.4       1.4
  27—Jackknife backward                                 1.4
  28—Jackknife forward with half twist                  1.9       1.9
  29—Jackknife forward with full twist                  2.1       2.1
  30—Jackknife backward with half twist                 2.0
  31—Jackknife backward with full twist                 2.2

_Plunge for Distance._ The maximum height of take-off for the plunge
for distance shall be limited to eighteen inches above the surface of
the water.

A plunge shall be a standing dive, made head first from an indicated
firm take-off (i. e., diving base), free from spring. The body is
to be kept motionless—face downward—and no progressive action to be
imparted to it other than impetus of the dive.

The plunge shall terminate, if the competitor has not already raised
his face above the surface of the water, at the expiration of 60
seconds, or such time as may have been previously announced by the
promoting body. The duration of such plunge shall be reckoned from
the time the competitor dives from the take-off.

At the finish of any plunge the competitor must leave the water as
quietly as possible. Anyone disturbing the water so as to interfere
with the progress of the competitor following will be disqualified.

The distance traversed in a plunge shall be measured along a straight
line, at right angles to the diving base, to a line parallel to the
diving base, over the farthest point reached by any portion of the
competitor’s body while fulfilling the above conditions.

In championship or level contests each competitor shall be allowed
three plunges, and the farthest plunge shall win. In handicaps, the
number of plunges shall be left to the discretion of the promoting
club.

When a competitor touches the side of the tank or pool, his distance
shall be taken and he shall be compelled to stop.

A line may be made or painted along the bottom of the pool or tank to
enable the competitors to guide themselves.

_Miscellaneous._ A competitor in turning must touch the end of the
bath or course with one or both hands before kicking off.

Standing upon the bottom in the shallow end of a bath during a
competition is only allowed for the purpose of resting. Walking or
jumping from the bottom in the shallow end of a bath shall not be
allowed.

The competitor in a handicap race who has the lowest handicap shall
have the choice of position.

Where two men are on the same mark they shall draw for choice of
position.

In case of a dead heat in a handicap the competitor with the lowest
handicap shall be declared the winner. Where a dead heat occurs
between two men on the same mark the tie shall be decided by a
swim-off on the same day, or the one refusing to swim shall be given
the next lowest prize.

Choice of position shall be drawn for in races other than handicaps.

When a trophy or prize is given to a club scoring the greatest number
of points in a meeting, the points shall be counted as follows:

                                  Points.
  First in swim, plunge or dive      5
  Second in swim, plunge or dive     3
  Third in swim, plunge or dive      1
  First in relay race               10
  Second in relay race               6
  Third in relay race                2
  First in water polo               15
  Second in water polo               9
  Third in water polo                3


HOW TO SCORE A DIVING COMPETITION.

SUGGESTIONS FOR SCORE CARDS.

Blanks for voluntary dives to be supplied by the club holding the
competition. After filling them out and signing them, competitors
deliver them to the clerk of the course. The announcer announces each
voluntary dive from these blanks when the respective competitor’s
turn comes, and the diving judges must see that the dive nominated
shall be performed. After the competition these blanks are turned
over to the diving scorers.

[Illustration: HIGH DIVE—FLYING SOMERSAULT FORWARD.]

[Illustration: HIGH DIVE—ONE AND A HALF SOMERSAULT FORWARD.]

[Illustration: HIGH DIVE—ARMSTAND WITH SOMERSAULT.]

[Illustration: HIGH DIVE—ONE SOMERSAULT FORWARD.]

[Illustration: HIGH DIVE—BACKWARD SPRING OUTWARD AND TURNING INWARD
WITH HEADER.]

[Illustration: Backward spring outward and turning inward with
somersault.

Backward spring outward and turning inward with 1½ somersault.

HIGH DIVE.]

[Illustration: HIGH DIVE—ISANDER’S DIVE.]

[Illustration: HIGH DIVE—MOLLBERG’S DIVE.]


VOLUNTARY DIVES.

  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
    |Number   |                                              |Grade of
    |in Table |               Description                    |Difficulty
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  1.|    6    |Forward, 1½ Somersault, standing              |   1.6
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  2.|    7    |Backward Somersault                           |   1.5
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  3.|   16    |Flying Dutchman, standing                     |   1.8
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  4.|   16    |Flying Dutchman, running                      |   1.9
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  5.|    8    |Backward, 1½ Somersault                       |   2.2
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  6.|   25    |Jackknife, forward, with Half Twist, standing |   1.8
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————

  Competitor’s Signature:
  _S. Jones_.


VOLUNTARY DIVES.

  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
    |Number   |                                              |Grade of
    |in Table |               Description                    |Difficulty
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  1.|   15    |2½ Forward Somersault, standing               |   2.3
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  2.|   15    |2½ Forward Somersault, running                |   2.3
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  3.|   18    |1½ Flying Dutchman, standing                  |   2.4
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  4.|   18    |1½ Flying Dutchman, running                   |   2.4
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  5.|   14    |1½ Forward Somersault with Half Twist,        |
    |         |  standing                                    |   2.2
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  6.|   12    |Backward Spring, 1½ Forward Somersault        |   2.0
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————

  Competitor’s Signature:
  _W. Smith_.


VOLUNTARY DIVES.

  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
    |Number   |                                              |Grade of
    |in Table |               Description                    |Difficulty
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  1.|    6    |Forward, 1½ Somersault, standing              |   1.6
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  2.|   12    |Backward Spring, 1½ Forward Somersault        |   2.0
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  3.|   16    |Flying Dutchman, running                      |   1.9
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  4.|   16    |Flying Dutchman, standing                     |   1.8
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  5.|    4    |Full Twist, forward, running                  |   1.8
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  6.|   25    |Jackknife, forward, with Half Twist, standing |   1.8
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————

  Competitor’s Signature:
  _J. Brown_.

[Illustration: Plain header.

Falling dive forward.

Ordinary header forward (arms at sides).

Screw dive forward with half turn.

SPRINGBOARD DIVE.]

[Illustration: Screw dive forward with one turn.

Pike dive forward.

Pike dive (arms at sides).

SPRINGBOARD DIVE.]

[Illustration: Mollberg’s dive.

Isander’s dive.

Backward somersault.

SPRINGBOARD DIVE.]


VOLUNTARY DIVES.

  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
    |Number   |                                              |Grade of
    |in Table |               Description                    |Difficulty
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  1.|   12    |Backward Spring, 1½ Forward Somersault        |   2.0
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  2.|   15    |Forward, 2½ Somersault, running               |   2.3
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  3.|   18    |1½ Flying Dutchman, standing                  |   2.4
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  4.|    8    |Backward, 1½ Somersault                       |   2.2
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  5.|    4    |Full Twist, forward, running                  |   1.8
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————
  6.|    4    |Full Twist, forward, standing                 |   1.8
  ——+—————————+——————————————————————————————————————————————+——————————

  Competitor’s Signature:
  _W. Black._


SCORE CARD AS FILLED OUT BY JUDGE AND DELIVERED TO DIVING SCORERS

First Column for Each Name Only to be Used by Judge.

  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
     NAME       |  JONES      |  SMITH      |  BROWN       |  BLACK
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  1. Compulsory |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |     |   |
       Dive     | 7  |   |    | 9  |   |    |8½   |   |    |9½   |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  2. Compulsory |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |     |   |
       Dive     | 8  |   |    |10  |   |    |9    |   |    |9    |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  3. Compulsory |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |     |   |
       Dive     | 9  |   |    |10  |   |    |9½   |   |    |10   |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  4. Compulsory |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |     |   |
       Dive     | 9  |   |    |10  |   |    |9½   |   |    |10   |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  1. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |     |   |
       Dive     | 7  |   |    | 2  |   |    |9    |   |    |7½   |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  2. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |     |   |
       Dive     | 9  |   |    | 3  |   |    |7½   |   |    |7    |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  3. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |     |   |
       Dive     | 8  |   |    | 1  |   |    |10   |   |    |5½   |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  4. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |     |   |
       Dive     | 4  |   |    | 0  |   |    |10   |   |    |9    |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  5. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |     |   |
       Dive     | 1  |   |    | 6  |   |    |6    |   |    |8    |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  6. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |     |   |
       Dive     | 7  |   |    | 8  |   |    |7½   |   |    |7    |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  Total         |             |             |              |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  Place Number  |             |             |              |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————

  Judge’s Signature:
  _J. S. White._

  Checked by...................................


SCORE CARD AS FILLED OUT BY DIVING SCORERS

The second column to be used for grade of difficulty for voluntary
dives to be left blank for compulsory dives. Last column to be used
for result of multiplication for voluntary dives, and on line of last
compulsory dive the total for all compulsory dives to be extended.

  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
     NAME       |  JONES      |  SMITH      |  BROWN       |  BLACK
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  1. Compulsory |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |   |   |
        Dive    | 7  |   |    | 9  |   |    |8½   |   |    |9½ |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  2. Compulsory |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |   |   |
        Dive    | 8  |   |    |10  |   |    |9    |   |    | 9 |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  3. Compulsory |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |   |   |
        Dive    | 9  |   |    |10  |   |    |9½   |   |    |10 |   |
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  4. Compulsory |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |   |   |
        Dive    | 9  |   |33.0|10  |   |39.0|9½   |   |36.5|10 |   |38.5
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  1. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |   |   |
        Dive    | 7  |1.6|11.2| 2  |2.3| 4.6| 9   |1.6|14.4|7½ |2.0|15.0
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  2. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |   |   |
        Dive    | 9  |1.5|13.5| 3  |2.3| 6.9|7½   |2.0|15.0| 7 |2.3|16.1
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  3. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |   |   |
        Dive    | 8  |1.8|14.4| 1  |2.4| 2.4|10   |1.9|19.0|5½ |2.4|13.2
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  4. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |   |   |
        Dive    | 4  |1.9| 7.6| 0  |2.4| 0.0|10   |1.8|18.0| 9 |2.2|19.8
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  5. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |   |   |
        Dive    | 1  |2.2| 2.2| 6  |2.2|13.2| 6   |2.2|13.2| 8 |1.8|14.4
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  6. Voluntary  |    |   |    |    |   |    |     |   |    |   |   |
        Dive    | 7  |1.8|12.6| 8  |2.0|16.0|7½   |1.8|13.5| 7 |1.8|12.6
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  Total         |         94.5|         82.1|         129.6|       129.6
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  Place Number  |     3       |      4      |    1½        |    1½
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
  Judge’s Signature:
  _J. S. White._

  Checked by _McCarthy_.

  ——————————————+———————————————————————————————————————————————————————
                |                 SUMMARY
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
     NAME       |  JONES      |  SMITH      |  BROWN       |  BLACK
  ——————————————+—————————————+—————————————+——————————————+————————————
                |Points| Place|Points| Place|Points| Place|Points| Place
  Judge WHITE   | 94.5 |  3   | 82.1 |  4   |129.6 | 1½   |129.6 | 1½
  ——————————————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————
  Judge GREEN   | 97.0 |  3   | 88.0 |  4   |132.4 | 1    |128.2 | 2
  ——————————————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————
  Judge ROSE    | 99.3 |  3   | 92.0 |  4   |129.2 | 2    |131.2 | 1
  ——————————————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————
    Total       |290.8 |  9   |262.1 | 12   |391.2 | 4½   |389.0 | 4½
  ——————————————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————
  Final placing |      |      |      |      |      |      |      |
  Average Points| 96.93| 3rd  | 87.37|  4th |130.4 |  1st |129.67| 2nd
  ——————————————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————+——————
  Scorers’ Signatures:
  _J. Wilson._       _B. Gordon._          _J. Van Dyke._

_Brown and Black having the same total of place numbers, the total of
points decides the competition and Brown wins._

[Illustration: Pike dive with backward spring and turning inward.]

[Illustration: Pike dive with backward spring, turning inward and
somersault.]

[Illustration: Pike dive with backward spring, turning inward and 1½
somersault.]

SPRINGBOARD DIVE.

[Illustration: Flying somersault forward.]

[Illustration: One and a half somersault.]

[Illustration: One and a half somersault (arms at sides).]

SPRINGBOARD DIVE.

[Illustration: Forward somersault.]

[Illustration: Falling dive backward.]

[Illustration: Ordinary header backward.]

SPRINGBOARD DIVE.




[Illustration:

  ACCEPT NO                                      GUARANTEES
  SUBSTITUTE     THE SPALDING     TRADE-MARK      QUALITY]

SPALDING WORSTED BATHING SUITS

All Styles Furnished in Sizes 28 to 46 Inches Chest Measurement.
Change Pocket in Trunks of All Spalding Bathing Suits.

[Illustration:

  No. 115      No. 111      No. 614]

  No. =115=. Sleeveless, extra quality fashioned worsted, with
    attractive striping, solid colors and mixtures on skirt of shirt
    and bottoms of tights in following colors: Black trimmed Gray,
    Brown and White stripe; Iron Gray, White and Black Stripe; Navy
    trimmed Maroon, Cardinal and White stripe Suit, =$7.00=

  No. =111=. Quarter sleeve, striped worsted, full fashioned, best
    quality, in following colors only: Gray trimmed White; Black
    trimmed Cardinal; Navy trimmed White            Suit, =$6.00=

  No. =110=. Sleeveless, worsted, full fashioned, best quality.
    Plain colors only: Navy, Black or Iron Gray        Suit, =$6.00=

  No. =614=. Sleeveless, fine worsted, striping on shirt and tights.
    Black, Cardinal and White striping; Navy, Gray and White striping;
    Gray, Navy and Cardinal striping; Iron Gray, White and Black
    striping       Suit, =$5.00=

  No. =109=. Sleeveless, fine quality worsted, solid colors only,
    either Black, Navy Blue or Heather Mixture     Suit, =$5.00=

[Illustration:

  PROMPT ATTENTION GIVEN TO                FOR COMPLETE LIST OF STORES
  ANY COMMUNICATIONS    A. G. SPALDING & BROS.  SEE INSIDE FRONT COVER
  ADDRESSED TO US      STORES IN ALL LARGE CITIES    OF THIS BOOK]

=PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE.= For Canadian prices see
special Canadian Catalogue.

[Illustration:

  No. 195      No. LR      No. 100PC]

  No. =195=. Sleeveless, fancy worsted, with attractive striping on
    shirt and tights in following colors: Gray trimmed White; Navy
    trimmed White; Black trimmed Red; Gray trimmed Navy. Suit, =$5.00=

  No. =LR=. Improved Pacific Coast style (patented). Buttons over one
    shoulder. Shirt attached to tights and tights cut away under skirt
    at sides. Supplied in following colors: Black, Navy or Heather.
    Suit, =$5.00=

  No. =100PC=. Pacific Coast style; that is, one piece, but with skirt
    which cannot be tucked inside of tights. Sleeveless, striped
    worsted, full fashioned, best quality. In following colors only:
    Gray trimmed Navy; Navy trimmed Cardinal; Navy trimmed White.
    Suit, =$5.00=

  No. =600BS=. Sleeveless, fine quality cut worsted with fancy striping
    on skirt and tights, in following colors: Navy trimmed White;
    Black trimmed Red; Black trimmed Green.  Suit, =$4.50=

[Illustration:

  No. 600PCS      No. 600PC      No. 601]

  No. =600PCS=. Pacific Coast style, that is, one piece, with skirt
    which cannot be tucked inside of tights. Sleeveless, striped, cut
    worsted. Colors: Navy trimmed White; Black trimmed Red; Dark Gray
    trimmed White.      Suit, =$4.50=

  No. =600PC=. Pacific Coast style, all in one piece, but with skirt
    which cannot be tucked inside of tights. Sleeveless, fine quality
    cut worsted in plain colors only; either Navy, Black, Gray or
    Maroon.                Suit, =$3.50=

  No. =601=. Quarter sleeve, fine quality cut worsted in plain colors
    only: Navy, Black or Maroon.       Suit, =$4.00=

  No. =600=. Sleeveless, fine quality cut worsted, in plain colors
    only: Navy, Black or Gray.         Suit, =$3.50=

  No. =300=. Sleeveless, light weight worsted. Plain colors only:
    Navy, Black or Gray. No special orders.    Suit, =$3.00=

[Illustration:

  No. 300S      No. 300PCS      No. 606]

  No. =300S=. Sleeveless, worsted. Striping on shirt and tights.
    Colors: Navy trimmed White, Black trimmed Red, Gray trimmed
    White.      Suit, =$3.00=

  No. =300PC=. Coast style, one piece; skirt cannot be tucked inside
    of tights. Sleeveless, worsted, plain colors: Navy, Black or
    Maroon. Suit, =$3.00=

  No. =300PCS=. Coast style, one piece; skirt which cannot be tucked
    inside tights. Sleeveless, worsted. Striping on shirt and tights.
    Colors: Navy trimmed White, Black trimmed Red, Gray trimmed White.
    Suit, =$3.00=

  No. =200=. Sleeveless, three quarters worsted, in plain colors only:
    Navy or Black. Suit, =$2.50=

  No. =28=. Quarter sleeve, cotton, fashioned, mercerized trimming,
    in following colors: Navy trimmed Red, Navy trimmed White.
    Suit, =$1.50=

  No. =P2S=. Coast style, finest quality cotton, trimmed shirt and
    tights. Colors: Navy and Red or Navy and White. Suit, =$1.50=

  No. =606=. Sleeveless, cotton, in Navy Blue, with either Red or
    White trimmings on shirt and tights. Suit, =$1.25=

  No. =605=. Sleeveless, cotton, Navy Blue. Suit, =$1.00=


Patent Combination Swimming Suit

No. =3R=. Best quality worsted, in solid color only, either plain
Black, plain Navy Blue or plain Gray. Shirt has combination
supporter. Arm holes extra large and shirt fastens to trunks at side
with invisible catches, making a tight fitting, neat combination.
White canvas belt, with adjustable buckle, forms part of trunks, no
drawing tape to knot or break. Pocket for change, etc., inside of
trunks. Furnished in regular length and extra long. Suit, =$5.50=

[Illustration: Trunks of No. 3R Suit]

[Illustration: Shirt of No. 3R Suit]


Expert Racing and Swimming Suits

No. =2S=. Men’s. Good quality silk one-piece suit. Navy Blue or
Black. Buttons over shoulders. Suit, =$4.00= * _$43.20 Doz._ No.
=2SL=. Women’s. Otherwise same as No. 2S. Suit, =$4.00= * _$43.20
Doz._ No. =4R=. Fine quality worsted. Made in plain Navy Blue or
plain Black. Buttons over shoulders. Suit, =$3.50= * _$37.80 Doz._
No. =2R=. Mercerized cotton, silky finish. Plain Black or Navy Blue.
Buttons over shoulders. Suit, =$2.00= * _$21.60 Doz._ No. =1R=.
Men’s. Cotton. Plain Black or Navy Blue. Snug fitting. Buttons over
shoulders. Suit, =$1.00= * _$10.80 Doz._ No. =1RL=. Women’s. Same as
No. 1R. Supplied also in Gray. Suit, =$1.00= * _$10.80 Dz._

[Illustration: No. 2S]


Spalding One-Piece Bathing Suits

  No. =50=. Sleeveless, cotton. Solid Navy
  Blue. Button at shoulders.       Suit, =$1.00= * _$10.80 Doz._


Flannel Bathing Knee Pants

No. =F=. Good quality Gray or Navy flannel knee pants; fly front;
belt loops. Loose fitting and just the thing for those who dislike
bathing tights. Dry quickly.

Pair, =$2.75= * _$29.70 Doz._


Spalding Worsted Bathing Trunks

  No. =2=. Cut worsted, in Navy and
  Black.       Pair, =$1.50= * _$16.20 Doz._


Cotton Bathing Trunks

  No. =601=. Navy Blue; Red or White
  stripes.                         Pair, =60c.= * _$6.48 Doz._
  No. =602=. Solid Navy Blue. Pair, =50c.= * _$5.40 Doz._
  No. =603=. Fancy stripes.     ”   =35c.= * _3.78_   ”

[Illustration: No. 1]


Spalding Bathing Slippers

  No. =FL=. Extra high cut; best quality canvas shoes,
  with special leather soles which will not
  harden. Pair,                  =$1.75=

  No. =RS=. Rubber sole; white
  canvas tops. Pair.             =75c.=

[Illustration: No. FL

Pat. Applied For]


_The prices printed in italics opposite items marked with * will
be quoted only on orders for one-half dozen or more at one time.
Quantity prices NOT allowed on items NOT marked with_ *


Spalding Water Polo Balls

No. =LC=. Special leather cover water polo ball. This style is used
in games under official rules. Ea., =$6.00= No. =1=. White rubber
fabric. Inflated, with key. Regulation size. Ea., =$2.25=


Official Water Polo Goal Nets

  Made in accordance with official
  rules                 Pair, =$10.00=

[Illustration: No. LC]


Official Association Water Polo Cap

No. =WPC=. Used to distinguish swimmers in match races, and to pick
out easily players on opposing teams in water polo games, the caps
being made in a variety of colors.

  Each, =$1.50=

[Illustration: No. WPC]


Water Polo Guide

  No. =129=. Directions for playing;
  official rules             Each, =10c.=


Bathing and Swimming Caps

  No. =SH=. Extra heavy pure gum rubber;
  large size; furnished in Black,
  Tan or Red.            Each, =75c.=

  No. =S=. Good
  quality pure
  gum rubber;
  large size; Black,
  Tan or Red.

  Each, =35c.=

  No. =DSC=. White duck skull cap, tape
  bound; ventilated           Each, =25c.=

[Illustration: No. S]

[Illustration: No. DSC]


Spalding Bathing Suit Bags

[Illustration: No. 1. Bag closed.]

[Illustration: No. 1. Bag open.

Note extra inside flap.]

No. =1=. Bag, for one suit. Blue mackintosh material, waterproof;
braid bound; glove clasp snap fasteners. Handle for carrying at top.
Supplied in medium and large sizes. Ea., =75c.= No. =2=. Bag, for
two suits. Special design adjustable roll effect. Blue mackintosh
material, waterproof; braid bound; glove clasp snap fasteners. Handle
at side for carrying. Supplied in medium and large sizes

  Each, =$1.25=

[Illustration: No. 2. Bag closed.]

[Illustration: No. 2. Bag open.

Note ample size and convenient shape.]


Canvas Bathing Belt

No. =C=. Made of white canvas, with metal buckle. Each, =60c.=


Ayvad’s Water Wings

No. =1=. Plain white. Ea., =35c.= No. =2=. Variegated colors. Ea.,
=50c.=

[Illustration:

  PROMPT ATTENTION GIVEN TO                FOR COMPLETE LIST OF STORES
  ANY COMMUNICATIONS    A. G. SPALDING & BROS.  SEE INSIDE FRONT COVER
  ADDRESSED TO US      STORES IN ALL LARGE CITIES    OF THIS BOOK]

=PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITHOUT NOTICE.= For Canadian prices see
special Canadian Catalogue




FOR OUR CUSTOMERS

THIS ORDER BLANK

IS FOR YOUR CONVENIENCE

YOU PURCHASED THIS BOOK AT

  +—————————————————————————————————————+
  |                                     |
  |                                     |
  |                                     |
  |                                     |
  |                                     |
  +—————————————————————————————————————+

We also sell a complete line of Spalding Athletic Goods as well as
all the books of the Spalding Athletic Library.


CONSULT THE FULL LIST

FOR OTHER BOOKS ON ATHLETICS

When ordering Athletic Goods use this sheet. Simply tear it out along
dotted line, fill in your wants on the reverse side, and mail it with
the price as noted.


_SEE THE OTHER SIDE_




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 13 Changed: we get a maximim amount
             to: we get a maximum amount

  pg 20 Changed: discovered that a person can go stilll
             to: discovered that a person can go still

  pg 47 Changed: best method now used, called the Schaeffer
             to: best method now used, called the Schaefer

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO SWIM ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
